Bee Book




                                                                                                       By
                                                                         Eric H. Ericson, Jr - Stanley D. Carlson - Martin B. Garmen




                                                                                              The Natural History of the
                                                                                                     Honey Bees


                                                                                              Micrographs of the Queen


                                                                                             Micrographs of the Workers


                                                                                              Micrographs of the Drones


                                                                                                       Appendix
                                                                                                   (anatomy of a bee)


                                                                                                        Glossary


                                                                                                  Selected References

                                               *    Reproduced with the permission of Iowa University Press
file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/index.html (1 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:42 PM]
Bee Book




                                                                                                                                                                     USDA-ARS
                                               GEARS is maintained by USDA-ARS. This server reports the results of research only. See official endorsements disclaimer.




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/index.html (2 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:42 PM]
 References




                     SELECTED REFERENCES

BERRIDGE, M. J., J. E. TREHERNE, AND V. B. WIGGLESWORTH, eds. 1982. Advances in Insect
Physiology. New York: Academic Press, 368 p.

BILSING, S. W. 1932. The rise of beekeeping. J. Econ. Entomol. 25(3):495-500.

BUTLER, C. G. 1959. The World of the Honeybee. London: Readers Union, 226 p.

CRANE, EvA, ed. 1976. Honey: A Comprehensive Survey. London: Heinemann, 608 p.

DADANT & SONS, eds. 1975. The Hive and the Honey Bee. Hamilton, Ill.: Dadant & Sons, 740 p.

DADE, H. A. 1962. Anatomy and Dissection of the Honeybee. London: International Bee Research
Association, 158 p.

DE WILDE, J. BEETSMA. 1982. The physiology of caste development in social insects. In Advances in
Insect Physiology, Vol. 16, ed. M. J. Berridge, J. E. Treherne, and V. B. Wigglesworth. London:
Academic Press, 167-246.

RIBBANDS, C. R. 1953. The Behaviour and Social Life of Honeybees. London: International Bee
Research Association, 352 p.

ROOT, A. 1. 1974. The ABC and XYZ of Bee Culture. Medina, Ohio: A. 1. Root Company, 703 p.

SHING, H., AND E. H. ERICKSON. 1982. Some ultrastructure of the honeybee (Apis mellifera L.)
sting. Apidologie 13(3):203-13.

SNODGRASS, R. E. 1928. Morphology and evolution of the insect head and its appendages.
Smithsonian Misc. Collect. 81(3):1-158.

SNODGRASS, R. E. 1935. Principles of Insect Morphology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 667 p.

SNODGRASS, R. E. 1942. The skeleto-muscular mechanisms of the honey bee. Smithsonian Misc.
Collect. 103(2):1-120.

SNODGRASS, R. E. 1956. Anatomy of the Honeybee. Ithaca, N.Y.: Comstock, 334 p.

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/ref.html (1 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:44 PM]
 References



TORRE-BUENO DE LA, J. R. 1950. A Glossary of Entomological Brooklyn, N.Y.: Brooklyn
Entomological Society, 345 p.

WHITEHEAD, A. T., AND J. R. LARSEN. 1976. Ultrastructure of the contact chemoreceptors of Apis
mellifera L. (Hymenoptera: Apidae). Int. J. Insect Morphol. Embryol. 5:301-15.

WILSON, E. 0. 1972. The Insect Societies. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap, 548 p.

WITHERELL, P. C. 1972. Can hairless honey-bees collect pollen? Am. Bee J. 112(4):129, 131.




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/ref.html (2 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:44 PM]
 Bee History




                                                               Return to Beebook

Honey Bees

Biology and Behavior

Products of the Hive

Pollination

Enemies of the Honey Bee


HONEY BEES
(Apis mellifera L.) preceded humans on earth by 10 to 20 million years. Honey bees are one of the
oldest forms of animal life still in existence from the Neolithic Age. Primeval humans gathered and ate
the honey and honeycombs of wild bees, the only available sweet, as far back as 7000 B.C. Bronze Age
societies celebrated preindustrial triumphs by drinking mead, probably the first intoxicating beverage,
fermented from honey. In fact, the words mead and mellifera (the specific name for honey bees), which
are similar in several languages, were derived from root words referring to honey bees, liquor, doctored
drink, etc. In the past, words for mead, honey, and honey bee have been used interchangeably, revealing
the importance placed on the alcoholic beverage derived from honey. Like honey, beeswax has been
prominent in ancient folklore and mythology. In the pre-Christian era, wax was offered as a sacrifice to
the gods; used in the rites of birth, circumcision, marriage, purification, and death; and used in
embalming, sealing coffins, and mummification. The use of beeswax in religious candles carried over
into Christian times and led to beekeeping by clergy and monks in order to ensure an adequate supply of
the raw material. In the past, beeswax served as a medium of exchange and taxation; it was exacted as
tribute from conquered nations and was used in writing, painting, sculpturing, and protecting works of
art, as well as for illumination. Honey, beeswax, and propolis (a mixture primarily of plant resins and
beeswax that bees use in nest contruction) have been used extensively in pharmacopoeia since 2700 B.C.
The principal medicinal value of honey arises from its antibacterial properties when used as a wound
dressing. Honey bees originated in southern Asia, probably in the region of Afghanistan. The earliest
record of humans gathering honey from wild colonies is from 7000 B.C. Man first kept bees about 3000
to 4000 B.C., perhaps as early as 5000 B.C. There is no way of knowing to what extent honey bees have
evolved since then; we can assume that some evolution has taken place, particularly with regard to the


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (1 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
 Bee History

social organization of the colony and foraging behavior. Apis mellifem, the most widely distributed of
the species of Apis, is not native to the Americas. The first record of the introduction of honey bees to
the western hemisphere was in 1530 in South America. It was introduced to North America by colonists
from Holland in 1638. Since bees visit a broad range of host plants and are able to conserve heat by
clustering, they have become widely dispersed and are now found throughout the world. Honey bees are
limited in their distribution mainly by an absence of suitable forage and/or less than 19.8 cm (7.8 inches)
of rainfall annually. The scientific name, Apis mellifera, was given the honey bee by Carolus Linnaeus
in 1758. It liter- ally means "the honey-carrying bee * " A more descriptive name, A. mellifica, or "the
honey-mak- ing bee ' " was proposed in 1761. While this second name more accurately describes honey
bees (which carry nectar but make honey), the rales governing precedence in scientific nomenclature
dictate that the earlier name be retained. Nevertheless, the term A. mellifica can still be found in some
bee literature. top?


BIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Honey bees and their life history and products were topics of study for early philosophers, such as
Aristotle, Pliny, and Virgil. Many others have studied bees throughout history. Yet, most basic
knowledge of the natural history of the honey bee has been gathered only since the sixteenth century.
Twentieth-century scientists have revealed the nature of honey bee sensory systems, behavior,
communication, and population dynamics. For example, it is now known that while honey bees do not
possess the fine-grained retinal mosaics of humans, they can navigate with precision by optically
scanning the sky's polarization patterns through their ultraviolet receptors. Moreover, they easily
perceive other colors and rapidly flickering patterns (as in flight at close range). Honey bees possess
senses of taste and smell about as acute as those of humans and even more acute for some flavors and
aromas. Other revelations are fast emerging about the flight muscle physiology of bees, their learning,
memory, dances, chemical communication systems, and reproductive physiology. Although it is often
more appealing to believe that bees are somehow special, honey bees are simply insects. Careful study
of the literature reveals that many insects behave and function in the manner of honey bees; that is, they
generate and conserve heat, raise young, forage, communicate, swarm, store provisions (some even
garden), and pollinate or otherwise provide food for humans. Moreover, they do so just as efficiently as
do honey bees. Honey bees may seem unique because they express all the above behavioral and
physiological traits; but special combinations of traits such as these are present in other insects, in plants,
and in animals, where they are equally compelling. So we must ultimately conclude that physiologically,
behaviorally, and biochemically honey bees are just insects, remembering, of course, that insects
themselves are quite remarkable. Although honey bees (and other bees) are often confused with their
near relatives, the wasps, bees can be easily identified by their fuzzy appearance (branched body hairs),
robust body, and flattened hind leg. There are more than 20 races of honey bees, the result of natural
selection in their respective homelands. But only 4 principal races are important to beekeeping in the
northern hemisphere: the Carniolans, Italians, Caucasians, and Dark bees. In the southern hemisphere,
other races are also important. Honey bee colonies are perennial and nearly worldwide in distribution;
they are distributed from the tropics to subarctic regions. This is possible because they hoard resources
and because they can thermoregulate their nests, by fanning to evaporate water for cooling, by

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (2 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
 Bee History

metabolizing honey to produce heat (0.1 cal per minute per bee), and by clustering to conserve the heat
they produce. Other insects are capable of producing similar levels of heat energy; for bees, however,
temperature regulation via clustering is the key to winter survival. Feral (wild) colonies nest in hollow
trees, rock crevices, and ground holes. They seem to prefer living trees. In the northern hemisphere most
nest entrances are knotholes facing southwest, undoubtedly because this is the side of the tree that
weathers and cracks first. Acceptable cavities are approximately 40 L (about the size of a one-story-deep
Langstroth hive), and wild colonies therein consist of about 18,000 to 20,000 bees in the most populous
summer months. Unlike most other insects, bees build their nests out of their own body products,
primarily wax and salivary secretions. Over the years apiculturists have gathered statistics in order to
better explain the organization and activities of a colony of kept honey bees. While such figures are
useful and interesting, one must keep in mind that they depend on season and locality, so extreme
variations are normal. In the summer, colonies managed by a beekeeper may consist of 40,000 to 60,000
adult bees (2 to 3 times that of feral colonies). These will likely be distributed among the three castes as
follows: 1 queen, 100 to 300 drones (up to 10,000 drones have been reported), 13,300 to 20,000 foraging
workers, and 26,600 to 40,000 workers engaged in various hive duties such as brood rearing, comb
construction, housecleaning, defense, and temperature regulation. The brood (eggs and young) in a
typical colony includes 5,000 to 7,000 eggs, 7,000 to 11,000 larvae being fed, and 16,000 to 24,000
pupae in sealed cells. A single worker larva is fed approximately 1,300 meals per day for 5 days and
grows to 300 times its original weight before pupation ensues (human growth is only 10 to 20 times
original body weight). Three-fourths of a larva's weight is made up of fat. During brood rearing, the
temperature of the brood nest is maintained at 32-35'C (90-95'F), usually 33-34'C (92-93'F). Since
worker bees metabolize honey to generate the heat needed to warm the hive, honey must be present in
the hive at all times. Colony humidity is also relatively constant at 48-50 +-6 6 percent relative humidity.
To accomplish this bees gather water and evaporate it in the hive when atmospheric humidity in the hive
is low. However, most hive humidity, including that needed for cooling, is derived from the water
content of nectar and from bee metabolism. When ambient relative humidity is high the bees are
apparently able, by some means, to maintain a lower level in the hive. Bee behavior is instinctive and
genetically pro- grammed. Yet bees have plasticity in their central nervous system, as exhibited by their
well-developed ability to learn and remember. Bees can learn in most sensory modalities (i.e., distance,
sight, smell, taste, and touch). There is some evidence of a rudimentary ability to reason, such as
associating flower type with reward. Bees are opportunists, as well, exploiting the most lucrative floral
sources to save time and energy. Nevertheless, habituation (training) is an important part of bee
behavior; bees can become accustomed to such things as frequent manipulation by beekeepers or the
presence of floral sources. Bees have evolved with numerous highly specialized sensory receptors that
are unevenly distributed over the head, thorax, and abdomen. In function, the head is principally sensory
for sight, smell, taste, and touch. The main portion of the brain within is a coalescence of three ganglia
(nerve centers) that process much of the sensory information and initiate appropriate behavioral patterns.
The thorax, tightly packed with well-innervated muscles, is the locomotory center for flight, walking,
and sound production. The feet and legs are believed to bear important taste and touch receptors, as well.
Certainly, the ability to build hexagonal wax cells of uniform size is dependent in part on sensory
receptors on the legs. In the abdomen are found digestive, circulatory, reproductive, and defensive
organs, along with the wax glands. Nerve and respiratory systems are distributed throughout the body.
Since the insect is encased in a hard exoskeleton, it must of necessity have specialized external sensory

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (3 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
 Bee History

areas. The bee's numerous external sensory receptors inform the central nervous system about the
external environment, as well as about events within the body (such as the direction in which legs and
wings are moving, whether the head is up or down, if the sting is in or out, or whether the bees is in
contact with food or forage). Honey bees communicate with one another both phonetically and
kinetically. Tonal qualities of sounds produced by bees suggest that several 14 moods" can be
communicated. The best known of their communication systems is the dance language that provides
information regarding the location of a particular source of forage. Information in this dance includes
distance, direction, and quality and quantity of food. The recruitment dances instinctively performed by
worker bees are in fact ritualized, miniaturized versions of the foraging trip the returning bee has just
taken. The recruit bee learns and practices the trip in miniature and then leaves on her own (rather than
being led, as with other social insects) to the source. Several other lesserknown dances are performed by
bees, and sound production by the dancing bees is an essential part of the dance activity. Bees also
communicate via the aroma and taste of the products they bring back to the hive, as well as by at least 31
pheromones (chemical compounds) they produce from glands in their bodies. Honey bees have no
unusual nutritional re- quirements, only a balanced diet containing carbo- hydrates, fats, proteins,
minerals, vitamins, and water.'Even so, the logistics of honey bee foraging and food consumption are
incredible. A typical colony may use up to 100 lb pollen for brood rearing each year; 4 million foraging
trips are required to collect this quantity. A single bee may carry up to 5 million pollen grains in a single
trip. Some pollen is proba- bly consumed, but most is mixed with small quanti- ties of honey or nectar
and possibly salivary prod- ucts and packed into cells adjacent to the brood nest where it undergoes a
chemical change to a product called bee bread. This product is stored until consumed by adult bees for
conversion into glandu- lar larval food, a kind of "mother's milk " Bee bread is the principal food of the
adult nurse bees. This nutrient was so named by primitive man because of its bready taste. Nurse bees
eat and convert bee bread into at least two different glandular secretions, which are then fed to bee
larvae. The diets of workers, queens, and drones are entirely dissimilar. Brood food recipes for each of
the three castes involve differing ratios of the two glandular products (each is the product of bees of a
different age); a quantity of honey is then added, the amount being caste dependent. Cannibalism of eggs
and larvae, which occurs during periods of food scarcity, can preserve the colony by conserving vital
nutritional elements. Under ideal conditions and depending on the plant species involved, a colony may
produce 90.7 kg (200 lb) or more surplus honey. The bees visit 2.5 to 500 million flowers for the nectar
from which this quantity is produced. Approximately 3.6 kg (8 lb) honey are consumed in foraging and
brood rearing to produce 0.45 kg (1 lb) surplus. Estimates of energy consumption indicate that foraging
bees get about 11,265,100 km (7 million flight miles) to 3.8 L (1 gal) honey. Normally bees forage no
more than a 3.2- to 4.0-km (2- to 2.5-mi) radius from the hive, covering 324 to 5062 ha (8,000 to 12,500
a) but may on occasion fly up to 16.1 km (10 mi) at a speed of 19.3 to 24 km (12 to 15 mi) per hour. The
farther that bees must fly from a colony to forage for nectar, the more fuel they burn and the less
efficient they are at producing a surplus of honey. The top speed of a worker bee is about 29 km (18 mi)
per hour. As with the production of heat mentioned earlier, honey must be present in the hive to refuel
foraging bees; without it foraging ceases.top?


PRODUCTS OF THE HIVE

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (4 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
 Bee History

Since humans first began keeping bees, their principal aim has been the harvest of honey. Thus
beekeeping methods have been adapted to accommodate colony behavior. Some success has been
achieved in manipulation of colonies to capitalize on certain behavioral traits, but honey bees must still
be considered wild, not domesticated, creatures, and honey a raw agricultural commodity. Ninety
percent of the world's beekeepers live in Europe, Russia, Asia, and Africa and produce 54 percent of the
world's honey by averaging 9.1 kg (20 lb) per colony. Ten percent of the world's beekeepers live in
Australia and North and South America and produce 46 percent of the world honey crop by averaging
22.7 to 45.4 (50 to 100 lb) per colony. Some stingless bees (not honey bees) are kept for honey
production, but the number of these colonies is comparatively small. Worldwide honey production is
currently in ex- cess of 544,320 t (600,000 tons) annually. This quantity is provided by an estimated 50
million colonies kept by about 61/2 million beekeepers. The current world population is around 3,500
million people, so there are approximately 500 times more honey bees than people. Honey is elaborated
from the nectar of numerous plant species but may also be produced from honeydew excretions of
aphids and scale insects). Nectars vary considerably in quality and quantity, depending on the floral
source. Similarly, honeys vary; some honey is nearly colorless (like water), with a light, pleasing aroma,
and some is as dark as crankcase oil, with a heavy-bodied aroma. Honey from most floral sources falls
between these extremes. Bees convert nectar to honey by drying it down to a moisture content of 15 to
20 percent and by adding a salivary enzyme that changes sucrose (long-chain sugar) into glucose and
fructose (two short-chain sugars); honey is composed of sugars, mainly fructose and glucose. Honey
also contains trace amounts of minerals, enzymes, vitamins, and colloids. Other biologically active
constituents (such as hydrogen peroxide and gluconic acid) inhibit some microbial development but
accelerate yeast growth. A limited number of plant sources yield nectar with toxic elements, but
fortunately bees either recognize and avoid these or are able to nullify their effects. (Beekeepers avoid
areas with such noxious plants.) Honey is used as a sweetener (1 part honey 1.67 parts sugar) and in
baking, baby foods, confectioneries, cosmetics, meat packing, pharmaceuticals, and syrups, and for
curing tobacco. Honey is often used to maintain moisture as well. In times past, it was believed to be a
powerful aphrodisiac. It is served in liquid or granulated (spread) form and in the comb; limited
quantities of dried honey are now available. But for bees, honey is the allpurpose food, essential for
stores of body fat, for flight, and in the production of heat, humidity, and wax. Other products of the
hive include pollen, brood (still eaten by some primitive cultures), propolis (bee glue), royal jelly,
venom, and of course beeswax. For making beeswax, each worker bee has four pairs of wax glands on
the underside of its r abdomen; these function best in 12- to 18-day-old bees, according to the needs of
the colony. Both protein (pollen) and carbohydrates (honey) are required to produce beeswax; 1 lb
beeswax, which contains about 450,000 wax scales, will provide enough wax to make 35,000 hexagonal
cells that can store 10 kg (22 lb) honey. Thus bees consume part of their food (pollen and honey) for the
purpose of converting it into nest structure -specifically cells for food storage and brood rearing. It takes
2.7 to 4.5 kg (6 to 10 lb) honey to produce 0.45 kg (1 lb) wax. Beeswax has many uses worldwide,
including the production of candles, cosmetics (the largest user-industry), electronics, lubricants, leather
and fabric preservatives, polishes, inks and paints, models for dentistry, and beer. A large portion of the
beeswax produced is recycled to the bee industry where it is used to produce the foundation for new
honeycomb and queen cell cups. World production of beeswax exceeds 9072 t (10,000 tons) annually.
Propolis is used in the attachment of combs to the top and sides of the hive, as well as for filling cracks,
reducing the size of the hive entrance, and embalming intruders. It is composed of plant resins gathered

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (5 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
 Bee History

by worker bees, beeswax (30 to 60 percent), balm (perhaps a glandular secretion of bees or a product of
honey bee digestion), as well as pollen and hive debris. In times past, varnishes responsible for the tonal
quality of violins and the finishes ori other fine woods contained refined propolis. The human nutritional
value of pollen and queen (royal) and worker jelly has been of great interest throughout the world.
However, there is much doubt as to their real worth. These jellies, larval food synthesized from the
digestion of pollen and secreted by the brood food glands of worker bees, have, like pollen, no proven
attributes except as bee food. Nevertheless, both are used in various cosmetics, lotions, and dietary
supplements. According to Greek mythology the infant Zeus, out of gratitude for the honey that
sustained him, gave the honey bee its sting for defense. Because the bee abused this power, Zeus later
decreed that the bee must die whenever the sting is used. Perhaps it is ironic that now we have
developed the means to milk venom from bees and use this product in medicine. The collection and sale
of bee venom is an increasingly popular although extremely limited enterprise. Presently, its greatest use
is in the treatment of bee venom hypersensitivity. It is also reported as helpful in reducing the pain
caused by certain types of arthritis. Commercial beekeeping has given rise to two additional hive
products, namely, the queen and worker honey bees. Worker bees are packaged and sold by the pound
by beekeepers who are engaged in this highly specialized form of beekeeping. Packages of worker bees
and queens are frequently delivered by the postal service. A package of bees normally contains 0.9 to
1.4 kg (2 to 3 lb) of bees plus a mated queen. Packaged bees are used for establishing new colonies or
for replacement of those lost through natural causes or catastrophic events. The selling of honey bee
queens is a highly lucrative commercial enterprise. Queens are often advertised as being of a specific
genetic origin with certain desirable attributes. These queens are used by beekeepers to requeen existing
colonies in which the old queen is failing or was lost. Beekeepers may also expand their businesses with
the purchase of additional queens; each new queen is installed in a new colony made by dividing an
existing colony in half (the old queen heads up the parent unit).top?


POLLINATION
Reproduction in many plant species is a sexual process analogous to that of animals. Pollen (equivalent
to sperm) must find its way to the stigma (equivalent to the vagina). Flower visitors, principally bees, are
essential in the transfer of pollen within and between flowers. Floral nectars and aromas attract bees and
thus ensure adequate pollination and the reproductive success of the plant. The honey bee's most
significant contribution to human dietary habits has been these pollination activities. Without honey bees
human tables and lives would be impoverished by a general lack of fruits, vegetables, flowers, and other
bee-pollinated plant products; and the human diet would be almost wholly restricted to cereals, some
nuts, and the meat of wild animals. One of the world's estimated 20,000 to 30,000 living species of bees,
the honey bee has become indispensable, humanity's greatest and most versatile insect benefactor. More
than 90 fruit, vegetable, nut, and seed crops are partially or entirely dependent on bees for pollination, as
are numerous ornamental plants and wild flowers. The value of bee-pollinated crops in the United States
is estimated to be $100 million100 times the value of the honey produced. These crops represent up to
one-third of the human diet in many countries. Mobile beekeepers in the United States and elsewhere
can even supply bees to farmers at the time pollination is needed. Early in the year these beekeepers
provide pollination services to growers in warm areas. They then move their hives into the more

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (6 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
 Bee History

temperate climates, following the spring weather northward (southward in the southern hemisphere) and
pollinating both orchard and field crops. When they terminate their annual trek, they collect a final large
honey crop and then return home in the fall to prepare for another northward migration the following
year.top?


ENEMIES OF HONEY BEES
Like other animal life, honey bees are beset by a variety of threats to their survival -disease, parasites,
nest destroyers and predators. Their enemies include other insects, mites, spiders, birds (woodpeckers,
bee martins, and honey buzzards), and mammals (bears, skunks, badgers, and baboons). The ever-
present wax moth is a particular problem; larvae of this moth destroy the wax combs of weak colonies
(and colonies kept by unwary




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/sec1/sec1.html (7 of 7) [1/21/2009 3:51:47 PM]
THE QUEEN




                                                       THE QUEEN




                        The Head                             The Thorax       The Abdomen




                                                                 Queen Info




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/queen.html [1/21/2009 3:51:48 PM]
THE WORKER




                                                    THE WORKER




                     THE HEAD                               THE THORAX     THE ABDOMEN




                                                             WORKER INFO




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/worker.html [1/21/2009 3:51:48 PM]
THE DRONE




                                                        THE DRONE




                         The Head                             The Thorax       The Abdomen




                                                                  Drone Info




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/drones.html [1/21/2009 3:51:48 PM]
file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/app.html




                                                        Appendix
                                       Major Anatomical Divisions
                                                 of the
                                              Honey Bee

         Figure A.1          Apis mellifera

         Figure A.2           Apis melliferaHead

         Figure A.3           Apis mellifera photoreceptors and antennae.

         Figure A.4           Apis mellifera worker mouthparts.

         Figure A.5           Apis mellifera thorax, lateral and ventral views.

         Figure A.6           Apis mellifera thorax, dorsal view, and ventral view of wing base

         Figure A.7           Apis mellifera wings.

         Figure A.8           Apis mellifera worker legs.

         Figure A.9           Apis mellifera worker tarsi, dorsal and ventral views.

         Figure A.10 Apis mellifera body wall.




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/app.html [1/21/2009 3:51:50 PM]
 Glossary




                                            GL0SSARY
                      A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z


ACROSOME. Caplike process at the distal end of the sperm that releases proteins and enzymes that
permit the sperm nucleus to enter the egg cytoplasm

ACUMINATE. Tapering to a point

AEDEAGUS. Penis

ALINOTUM. Wing-bearing plate on the dorsal surface of the mesothorax or metathorax

ANNULATE. Furnished with or composed of rings; composed of rings of cuticle

ANTECOSTAL. Pertaining to a particular ridge on the inner side of a tergal or sternal plate that forms
an attachment site for longitudinal muscles

ANTERIOR. Situated before or toward the front; opposite Of POSTERIOR

APODEME. Any cuticular ingrowth of the body wall, usually formed in a multicellular matrix such as
body cuticle

APOPHYSIS. (plural, APOPHYSES) Any internal or external outgrowth of the body wall (cuticle)

AROLIUM. Median lobe of the pretarsus, arising between the bases of the claws

ARTIFACTUAL. Pertaining to any artificial accoutrements in a natural process or subject; a substance
or structure not naturally present

ATRIUM. Cuticular antechamber leading from the spiracular opening to the tracheal orifice

AURICLE. Structure in the front end of the first tarsal segment of the hind leg that pushes the pollen
mass up into the pollen basket of the hind tibia

AUXILIA (plural, AUXILIAE). Small plates beneath the bases of the pretarsal claws that bear the
pulvilli

AXONEME. Flagellar structure (tail) of an insect sperm


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (1 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary




BALM. See PROPOLIS

BASALARE. Pleurite (lateral sclerite) arising from the episternum, a rounded bib of exoskeleton
anchoring (giving insertion to) the anterior pleural muscles of the wing

BASICONICUM. See SENSILLUM AMPULLACIUM and SENSILLUM BASICONICUM

BASISTERNUM. Principal sclerite or area of the sternum anterior to the roots of the sternal apophyses
or the sternal costal suture

BASITARSUS. Proximal segment of the tarsus; the first and largest segment of the honey bee foot

BEE BREAD. Pollen stored in the comb, to which bees have added small quantities of nectar and other
largely unknown products

BICONVEX. Convex or protuberant on both sides; in insect eyes, pertaining to the shape of the corneal
lens of each ommatidium of the compound eye or the single lens surmounting each ocellus

BIPOLAR. Having two poles; pertaining to the most common type of sensory neuron of cuticular sense
organs, one pole the distal dendrite (which is continuous with the neuronal cell body), the other
(proximal) pole the origin of the axon

BLEB. Any small blisterlike projection

BROOD. Eggs, larvae, and pupae



CALCARIS. Multicellular spur set in a membranous socket (the wax spur in the honey bee)

CAMERA (noun). Curved narrow sclerite underlying the paired lobes of the arolium; (adjective)
pertaming to an eye type possessing a lens that admits and refracts light to a photosensitive retina behind
the lens

CAMPANIFORM. Bell-shaped, pertaining to a type of external proprioceptor (a sense organ housed
under a small dome or bell-shaped cuticular elevation that consists of a single relatively large bipolar
rieuron whose distal tip is embedded in modified cuticle that is displaced as the surrounding cuticle is
stressed, which action is the adequate stimulus for this receptor); pertaining to a stress receptor
monitoring tension developed from muscle activity, usually at joints (these strain gauges are widely

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (2 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

distributed on the body and appendages of the honey bee)

CANNULAR. Pertaining to a small tube or carmula, usually a cuticular canal or channel

CARDO. (plural, CARDINES) Basal ring in the genitalia; more commonly, the proximal subdivision of
a maxillary appendage; and in the honey bee worker a slender, cuticular, sticklike process that articulates
with the lorum and stipes

CERVIX (also CERVICUM). Neck, either the connecting piece between head and thorax or the neck of
the drone penis between vestibulum and bulb

CHAETICA. See SENSILLUM CHAETICUM

CHALAZA. Discrete bulbous elevation of the body wall that constricts the hair socket

CHEMORECEPTOR (also CHEMOSENSOR). Sense organ that can detect odorant molecules in air or
water

CHEMOSENSOR. See CHEMORECEPTOR

CIBARIUM. Food pocket of the external or preoral mouth cavity between the base of the hypopharynx
and the undersurface of the clypeus

CLYPEUS. Facial area of the cranium just above the labrum, usually separated from the frons by an
epistomal suture

COMET. Aggregation of airborne drone honey bees

CONDYLE. Any process by means of which an appendage is articulated in a rounded cavity

CORNEA. Optically transparent cuticle overlying the ommatidia of the compound eye or the
photoreceptors of the dorsal ocelli

CORNUTUS (plural, CORNUTI). Horn or hornlike process of the male genitalia

COSTA. Thickened anterior margin of the wing (according to wing vein nomenclature, the costa is the
vein extending along the anterior margin of the wing)

COXA. Basal (most proximal) segment of the leg, the medial surface of which articulates with the body

CUTICLE (adjective, CUTICULAR). Protein-chitinous material making up the exoskeleton and lining

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (3 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

of the foregut and hindgut



DENDRITE. Receptive portion (usually) of the nerve cell where the generator potential (stimulus)
originates; also the postsynaptic region of an interneuron

DENTICLE. Small tooth or toothlike process

DIOPTRIC. Refractive, pertaining to corneal lens and cones, which are capable of bending light rays
toward the rhabdomeres of underlying photoreceptor cells

DISTAL. That part of the body (or an appendage) that is farthest from the body

DORSAL. Pertaining to the upper surface; opposite of VENTRAL

DORSUM. Upper surface.



EMPODIUM. Spinelike process springing from the unguitractor of the foot

EPICRANIUM. Dorsal surface of the head

EPIMERON. Posterior division of a thoracic pleuron

EPIPLEURON. Pleural sclerite of the prothoracic segment

EPISTERNUM. Anterior and larger lateral thoracic sclerite between the sternum and the notum; the
anterior sclerite of the pleuron

EPISTOMAL. Pertaining to the lower face between the mouth and eyes, or to a sclerite immediately
behind or above the labrum

ESOPHAGUS. That part of the foregut that lies between the pharynx and crop

EXOCUTICLE. Primary cuticular layer, a rigid, relatively thick, structureless layer of cuticle situated
between the epicuticle (outer) and endocuticle (inner) layer of the exoskeleton

EXORECEPTOR. Any receptor cells or organs that monitor and sense forms of energy that arise outside
of the bee (such as light quanta and odorant molecules)


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (4 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary




FACET. Polygonal (sometimes round in a frontal view) subdivision of corneal lens cuticle forming the
outer boundaries of an ommatidium of the compound eye

FASCICLE. Bundle or cohesive group

FEMORAL. Pertaining to the femur

FEMUR. Third and usually largest (or stoutest) segment of a leg; the thigh

FIBULA. Jugal fold of the wing; also, the spur at the end of the tibia that closes over the toothed notch
on the basitarsus to form an enclosed antenna cleaner

FLABELLUM (also LABELLUM). Distal lobe of the glossa (tongue)

FLAGELLUM. That portion of the antenna beyond the second segment, which may be subdivided; a
whiplike process; the tail of a sperm

FLEXION. Bending in which the angle lessens between the bending components

FLEXUOUS. Having a bending quality; capable of bending

FORAMEN. Opening in the body wall to permit passage of viscera from one part to another

FORAMEN MAGNUM. Hole in the back of the head capsule that is linked with the cervix, through
which passes the ventral nerve cord, esophagus, dorsal vessel, and other viscera

FOSSA. Pit or deep sulcus

FRONS. Unpaired sclerite of the head lying between the arms of the epicranial suture; the anterior
portion (forehead) of the head capsule

FRONTAL. Pertaining to the front of the head or to the anterior aspect of any part




GALEA. Outer lobe of the maxilla, which in the worker honey bee is a long, thin, tapering blade

GASTER. Globular or ovoid last seven segments (two to eight) of the abdomen behind the petiole; the

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (5 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary


abdomen

GENA. Cheek, the part of the head on each side below the eyes

GLABROUS. Smooth, not hairy

GLIA. Nonexcitable cells that accompany and ensheath neurons

GLOSSA (plural, GLOSSAE). Tongue, which in the honey bee is long, densely hairy, and split
posteriorly by a deep groove (the bee tongue is flexible and contractile)

GUSTATORY. Pertaining to gustation, the sensing of water-borne odorant molecules; pertaining to the
sense of taste




HEMOLYMPH (also HAEMOLYMPH). Blood; in bees a solution containing a variety of nucleated
cells called hemocytes possessing little or no respiratory function

HIRSUTE. Hairy

HYPOPHARYNX. Ventral portion of the stomodeal section of the alimentary canal posterior to the
mouth (in the honey bee, the hypopharynx is an intergnathal lobe, spanning functional mouth and
cibarium)




INFRAEPIMERON. Lower (most ventral) sclerite of the epimeron

INNERVATED. Supplied with nerves that can communicate with other body parts

INTER-. Prefix meaning between

INTERSTITIAL. Pertaining to an area between two lines or two body tissues

INTRA-. Prefix meaning within

INTRAEPIMERON. That area within an epimeron (a posterior division of a thoracic pleuron)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (6 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary



JOHNSTON'S ORGAN. Mechanoreceptor organ located in the second segment of the antenna (a
scolopophorous organ usually consisting of some scores of bipolar neurons whose apical ends
(dendrites) insert into the basal part of the third segment of the antenna; these collective, oriented nerve
cells are stimulated by particular frequencies induced in the antenna when the latter comes in contact
with vibrations propagated in air, water, or ground)

JUGAL. Pertaining to the area of origin of the forewing, particularly its posterior margin




LABELLUM. See FLABELLUM

LABIUM. Second maxilla; the lower lip; in the honey bee worker, a compound structure consisting of
the prementurn, postmentum, labial palpi, ligular lobes, glossa, paraglossae, and various glands

LABRUM. Upper lip, covering the base of the mandibles and forming the roof of the mouth

LANCET. Swordlike cuticular process with serrated edges used for piercing by the sting apparatus

LATERAL. Pertaining to the outside margins; opposite Of MEDIAL

LIGULA. Major portion of the labium, consisting collectively of the glossa and paraglossae

LORUM. Flexible, transverse band supporting the base of the submenturn, with its extremities attached
to the distal ends of the cardines (see CARDO)




MANDIBLE. One of two flattened, shovellike cuticular mouthparts in worker and queen honey bees
that act as a pair of grasping organs for food ingestion and the manipulation of wax in comb building

MAXILLA (plural, MAXILLAE). Paired mouthparts for chewing and shredding located below the
mandibles, consisting of a number of cuticular sclerites (galea, lacinia, stipes, cardo)

MECHANORECEPTOR. Sense organ capable of registering various mechanical (physical)
perturbations that originate within or outside the insect

MEDIA. Wing vein; the fourth longitudinal vein extending from the base through approximately the
middle of the wing



 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (7 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

MEDIAL. Pertaining to the middle of something; opposite Of LATERAL

MENTUM (also PREMENTUM). Part of the tongue, the second sclerite bearing the labial palpi,
paraglossae, and ligula

MESOEPISTERNUM. Mesothoracic episternum

MESOMERES. One of two medially situated, secondary lobes at the posterior end of the drone pupa,
which are phallic rudiments that unite in the adults to form the aedeagus

MESONOTUM. Dorsal surface of the second or middle thoracic segment of the adult insect

MESOPEDE. Middle leg

MESOSTERNUM. Main ventral (breast) sclerite of the mesothorax

MESOTHORAX (adjective, MESOTHORACIC). Second thoracic segment

METANOTUM. Dorsal sclerite (plate) on the insect's back; on the last thoracic segment

METATHORAX (adjective, METATHORACIC). Third and last thoracic segment

MICROPYLE. Area of minute openings in the insect egg through which sperm gain entry

MICROTRICHIA. Miniature body hairs, not articulated and probably not innervated

MONOCONDYLE. Pertaining to a joint having only one condyle and thus a single point of articulation




NEURON. Nerve cell, capable of being depolarized or hyperpolarized when stimulated and conveying
this transient potential change along its length

NOTUM (adjective, NOTAL). General name or suffix given to dorsal sclerites

NUMERAL. Pertaining to a particular number




OCCIPITAL. Pertaining to the occiput


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (8 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary


OCCIPUT. Back of the head

OCCLUSOR. Muscle that closes a spiracle when it contracts partially or completely

OCELLUS. Simple eye (so-called) consisting of relatively few photoreceptor cells under one smooth
biconvex lens; in honey bees, three ocelli are situated on the vertex

OLFACTORY. Pertaining to reception of air-borne odorant molecules by chemoreceptors

OMMATIDIUM (plural, OMMATIDIA). All the photoreceptor cells, dioptric apparatus, and associated
pigmented glial cells of one lens facet

OPERCULUM. Cover or lid

ORIFICE. Opening, entrance, or hole.




PALP. Telopodite or lobe of a mouthpart appendage PAPILLA (plural, PAPILLAE). Minute, soft
projection

PAPILLATE. Covered with small projections

PARAGLOSSA (plural, PARAGLOSSAE). One of the paired, thin, elongate lobes arising from the
common ligular base on the prementum at the sides of the tongue, their concave inner surfaces clasping
the base of the tongue

PARAMERE. One of the paired lateral processes or lobes of the phallobase

PECTINATE. Comblike; pertaining to the rigid incurved setae on the basal parts of the maxilla and
labium or the rows of spines on the feet

PEDICEL (also PEDICELLUS). Second segment of antenna

PEG ORGAN . See SENSILLUM AMPULLACIUM and SENSILLUM BASICONICUM

PENULTIMATE. Next to last

PETIOLE. Stalk or stem; in honey bees, the greatly constricted area between the first and second
abdominal segments


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (9 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

PHALLOBASE. Base of the phallus (penis)

PHALLOTREME. End or distal opening of the aedeagus (penis)

PHALLUS (adjective, PHALLIC). Penis

PHEROMONE. One of the biochemicals produced by various glands that have warning, aphrodisiac,
trail-forming, and other functions, the chemoreception of which in insects initiates social responses and
(perhaps) endocrine changes

PHoTONEGATIVE. Avoidance (behavioral) reaction to light

PHOTORECEPTOR. Cell or collection of cells, usually characterized by the presence of rhabdomeric
microvilli containing visual pigment, that are specialized in the absorption of light quanta

PIPING. See QUACKING

PIT ORGAN. See SENSILLUM AMPULLACIUM and
SENSILLUM COELOCONICUM

PIT PEG. Peg sensillum arising from the base of a pit or other cuticular cavity

PLACOID. See SENSILLUM PLACODEUM

PLANTA. Sclerite forming the basal joint of the posterior tarsus, the sole of the posterior tarsal joint just
proximal to the arolium, which is covered with ranks of strong spines

PLATE ORGAN. See SENSILLUM PLACODEUM

PLEURITE. Any sclerite in the pleural (lateral) portion of a body segment

PLEURON. Pleurite; also the subcoxal sclerotization above, before, and behind the coxa

POLARIZATION PATTERN. Electric vector of linearly polarized skylight, which can be perceived by
ultraviolet receptors in the bee compound eye and used for navigation

POLYGONAL. Having many straight sides

PORE. Surface opening, blind-ended or continuous

POSTERIOR. Hindmost; opposite Of ANTERIOR

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (10 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary



POSTMENTUM. Triangular, small sclerite, a constituent of the labium

POSTOCCIPUT. Extreme posterior rim of the head capsule, that portion behind the occipital suture

PREMENTUM. See MENTUM

PRESCUTUM. Anterior area of the mesonotum or metanotum between the antecostal suture and the
prescutal suture

PRETARSUs. Terminal segment of the insect leg, the functional foot of the insect.

PROBOSCIS. Composite "organ" formed of the maxillae and labium, especially or only when those two
appendages are brought together to form a tube through which liquids are drawn up to the mouth by the
cibarial pump

PROCTIGER. Small papilla bearing the anus

PRONOTUM. Dorsal surface of the prothorax

PROPODEUM (adjective, PROPOIJEAL). First abdominal segment, which appears to be part of the
thorax

PROPOLIS. Admixture of plant resin, beeswax, and other unknown products (probably glandular in
origin) produced by worker bees and used for various purposes including filling cracks in the hive, glue
for suspending combs, and for embalming intruders

PROPRIOCEPTOR. "Sense organs capable of continuously registering deformation (changes in length)
and stress (tensions, decompressions) in
the body, which can arise from the animal's own movements, its weight or other external mechanical
forces " (Lissman 1950)

PROTHORAX. First (most anterior) thoracic segment

PROTRACTOR MUSCLE. Muscle that permits an extension

PROXIMAL. Nearest the organism

PULVILLUS. Padlike structure between the tarsal claws or on the underside of the tarsal joint

PUNCTATE. Having pits or punctures


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (11 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary


PUPATION. Metamorphosis from the larval stage to the pupal stage

PUTATIVE. Commonly accepted, reputed



QUACKING. Sound made by queen bees




RADIUS. Third of the longitudinal veins behind (or counting from) the subcosta

RAMUS (plural, RANH). Branchlike division of any structure or appendage; a cuticular, curved sclerite
that forms the base of a lancet of the sting apparatus

RASTELLUM. "Little rake"; in worker honey bees, a row of closely set spines forming a comb on the
distal tip of the hind tibia that functions as a portion of the pollen press

RHABDOMERE. Ranked microvilli on the medial and distal surfaces of the photoreceptor cell, an array
that constitutes the photoreceptor organelle (as these photosensitive membranes contain the visual
pigment)

ROYAL JELLY. Generic term for glandular products fed to bee larvae; more correctly used to identify
those glandular products fed to queen larvae for the first 3 days of life

RUGOSITY. Roughness in surface texture




SCAPE. First (most proximal) segment of the antenna

SCLERITE. Any portion of the insect exoskeleton bounded by sutures

SCLEROTIZED. Process of cuticular hardening and darkening leading to tanned protein called sclerotin

SCUTELLUM. Smaller part of the alinoturn set off by the transcutal suture (fissure) through the
posterior part of the Scutum

SCUTUM. Part of the alinotum sandwiched between the prescutum and mesoscutum



 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (12 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

SENSILLUM (plural, SENSILLA). One, several, or many aggregated sense cells, usually responsive to
a common modality (although some trichoid sensilla may have several olfactory receptor cells and a
single mechanoreceptor cell)

SENSILLUM AMPULLACIUM. Basiconic peg organ that is covert within a long cuticular canal within
the cuticle and is reported to be an olfactory receptor (see SENSILLUM BASICONICUM)

SENSILLUM BASICONICUM. Olfactory sense organ, consisting of an external small cone or peg,
usually unjointed at its base, with lateral side pores that permit ingress of odorant molecules, which
contact the dendrite membranes of one to several bipolar sensory neurons within the peg

SENSILLUM CHAETICUM. Hairlike (or bristlelike) sense organ whose function is to detect movement
and/or olfaction

SENSILLUM COELOCONICUM. Olfactory sense organ in the form of a pit peg

SENSILLUM PLACODEUM. Platelike olfactory sensillum, abundant on the honey bee antenna

SETA (plural, SETAE). General term for cuticular hairs, which may or may not be innervated

SETOSE (also HIRSUTE). Bearing setae

SPATULATE. Rounded and/or broad at the top and slender at the base

SPERMATHECA. Sac in the female insect acting as a reservoir for sperm received from the male

SPICULE. Slender, needlelike cuticular process

SPIRACLE. Breathing pore in the exoskeleton contiguous with internal tracheae

STERNACOSTA. Internal ridge developed from the (externally visible) sternal suture; usually the bases
of the sternal apophyses line up on this ridge

STERNELLUM. Area of the sternum posterior to the bases of the sternal apophyses or the sternacostal
suture

STERNITE. Subdivision of a sternal plate; any one of the sclerotic components of a definitive sternum

STERNUM. General name for the ventral aspect of the organism; opposite the dorsal TERGUM

STIPES. One of the basal segments of the maxilla, the distal part of the coxal base of the maxilla and the

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (13 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

one to which the maxillary palps and galea are affixed distally

STRIGILIS. That portion of the antenna cleaner at the distal end of the tibia that closes over the notch in
the basitarsus (in some texts STRIGILIS and FIBULA are synonymous)

STYLET. Medial part of the shaft of the sting, which is flanked by the barbed lancets (the lancets and
stylet combine to form a channel through which the venom is discharged)

SUBALARE. Epipleurite (of the epimeron) that provides anchorage for the posterior muscles of the
wing

SUBCOSTA. Wing vein immediately behind and parallel to the costa; the second vein projecting along
the leading edge of the wing

SULCUS. Furrow or groove of the cuticle

SUPRAEPIMERON. Upper sclerite of the epimeron

SUPRAEPISTERNUM. Upper sclerite of the episternum

SUTURE. Seam in the cuticle indicating the division of distinct parts of the body wall




TANGENTIAL. Pertaining to a direction oblique to the object in question

TARSOMERE. Any segment of the tarsus (foot)

TARSUS. Foot; the combined tarsomeres

TEGULA. Major, dorsally situated, triangular articular sclerite of the forewing

TELOPODITE. Distal portion of the insect limb beginning with the trochanter

TEMPORAL. Pertaining to the temples, the posterior aspect of the side of the head

TENTORIUM. Endoskeleton of the insect head; in the bee, consisting mainly of two cannular,
sclerotized arms extending from the anterior tentorial pits in the epistomal suture posteriorly and upward
to the posterior pits in the postoccipital sulcus, including a narrow, arched, hollow rod (tentorial bridge)
that forms a bridge between the posterior ends of the bars


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (14 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
 Glossary

TERGITE. Any dorsal sclerite or part of a dorsal segment

TERGUM. Dorsal surface of any body segment, often subdivided into a number of smaller segments or
sclerites

TERMINAL. Last, ultimate

TERMINALIA. Terminal or last abdominal segments, usually including the genital structures

TERMINUS. Extremity (at either end)

THENAR. Prominence at the base of a claw

THORAX. Second body region of the insect which bears the true legs and wings

TIBIA. Fourth division of the leg, situated between the femur and the tarsus

TORMOGEN CELL. Epidermal cell that gives rise to the socket housing a seta, then later functions as




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/glossary.html (15 of 15) [1/21/2009 3:51:52 PM]
THE HEAD OF THE QUEEN




                                                         THE HEAD




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/head.html [1/21/2009 3:51:53 PM]
THE THORAX OF THE QUEEN




                                                      THE THORAX




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/thorax.html (1 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:53 PM]
THE THORAX OF THE QUEEN




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/thorax.html (2 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:53 PM]
THE ABDOMEN OF THE QUEEN




                                                 THE ABDOMEN




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/abdomen.html [1/21/2009 3:51:54 PM]
 QUEEN INFO




                                                                               QUEENS ARE THE PRODUCT   of
                                                             fertilized eggs; they receive a special diet
                                                             throughout larval life consisting of royal jelly
                                                             for the first 3 days and a modified jelly
                                                             thereafter. Caste is apparently determined by
                                                             food volume and the quantity of juvenile
                                                             hormone and water in the larval diet. Sixteen
                                                             days are needed to complete development
                                                             from the egg. When a colony of bees decides
                                                             to provide itself with a new queen, several are
reared. Usually, the first queen to emerge kills her sisters and, if the mother is present, disposes of her as
well. After about 5 days of adulthood, the virgin queen begins a series of mating flights. As a result, a
queen may mate with 6 to 18 or more drones and store 5 to 12 million quiescent sperm in a special sac in
her abdomen called a spermatheca. Once this initial period of copulation is passed, the queen no longer
attempts to mate. Instead, her abdomen enlarges to accommodate her fertile ovaries and she becomes an
egglaying machine. A queen may live I to 2 years, although life spans in excess of 5 years have been
reported. Normally, however, 60 percent of the queens die or are replaced during the first year.

Relationships between individuals within a colony may be quite complex. A new queen is usually reared
within a colony from one of the many eggs produced by her mother, and thus a queen is often
simultaneously a mother of some colony inhabitants and a sibling of others. As a consequence of a
unique sex determination system, there are three possible levels of relationship among siblings within a
colony. Those that have the same father are super sisters, those whose fathers are brothers are full
sisters, and those with unrelated fathers are half sisters. Thus worker bees within a colony cannot be
considered a homogeneous genetic mixture. The colony is in fact a collection of subfamilies different in
genetic origin.

The queen is fed and groomed by worker attendants. Her egg-laying rate is governed by the workers,
probably through the amount of food they provide her. Reported maximum egg-laying rates vary; some
authorities report production in excess of 2000 eggs per day. The queen is capable of laying 2 to 3 times
her body weight in eggs in a single day. A queen determines the sex of her progeny by fertilizing or
withholding sperm from the egg as it passes down the oviduct (the mechanism by which a queen
accomplishes this is unknown). The fertilized and unfertilized eggs are deposited correctly in worker and
drone cells respectively.

Although larval diet is the single factor that governs eventual development of a queen (worker larvae
receive a different larval food), there are at least 53 known characteristics that differentiate a queen from
her sister workers. Notably the queen's eyes are smaller and her brain is reduced in size. Her only
complex behavior seems to be that of seeking out and killing sister queens and mating.


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/info.html (1 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:55 PM]
 QUEEN INFO

Humans have learned to control the genetics of honey bees, and production of hybrid honey bee stock
has been under way for many years. The purpose of this hybridization, as with other species, is to
incorporate a number of favorable characteristics into a single genetic line. To accomplish this, methods
have been developed for the instrumental insemination of queens. Completion of a successful hybrid
system hinges on development of an adequate means of germ plasm (sperm or egg) storage or
maintenance.

The plate layouts, determined primarily by subject matter, were created for their instructional value and
to enhance reader interest. The sequence of micrograph identifications thus varies according to the
location of the survey micrograph(s). Unless indicated otherwise, the micrographs are oriented so that
the head is to the left, the dorsal side at the top.

Back to THE QUEEN




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/info.html (2 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:51:55 PM]
The Head of the Worker Bee


                                                          THE HEAD




BACK TO "THE WORKER"




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/head.html [1/21/2009 3:51:56 PM]
THE THORAX


                                                      THE THROAX




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/thorax.html [1/21/2009 3:51:57 PM]
THE ABDOMEN




                                                 THE ABDOMEN




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/abdomen.html [1/21/2009 3:52:02 PM]
 WORKER INFO




                                                                                WORKER BEES ARE IMPERFECT
                                                                                FEMALES maternally developed to provide all
                                                                                life support systems. Together with the sexually
                                                                                developed queen, also an imperfect female, the
                                                                                workers form the perfect female system-
                                                                                reproduction plus sustenance.

                                                                                Worker honey bees are produced from fertilized
                                                                                eggs in 21 days (compared with 16 for queens).
                                                                                They lack fully developed sex organs as a result
                                                                                of a controlled diet that leads to hormonal
                                                                                deficiencies. However, some workers may
                                                                                develop functional ovaries and lay significant
                                                                                numbers of unfertilized eggs that develop into
                                                                                drones. Moreover, it is reported that worker bees
in queenless colonies can produce female
offspring from diploid eggs via parthenogenesis (that is, without mating). This occurs most frequently in
one race of bees, which occasionally requeen colonies with worker-produced progeny.

Workers are the labor force of the colony, performing specialized duties based primarily on their age.
Early in adult life they engage in hive duties such as brood rearing, comb construction, and colony
defense, while late in their lives they become foragers.

Contrary to popular opinion worker bees are frequently idle, and foraging bees are highly opportunistic.
Hive bees spend most of their time unproductively, and foragers prefer the most lucrative nectar and
pollen sources. Although the divisions of labor are fairly clear-cut based on age, research has shown that
in a worker population with an unbalanced age structure resulting from some catastrophic event,
individual worker bees will adapt and assume duties that are not normal for their age. It has been shown
that when bees are forced to modify their behavior in this fashion they perform less effectively than
when they follow a normal sequence of development. Although the pheromones produced by the queen
are necessary to maintain the integrity of the hive, worker bees are thought to control the fate of the
colony by their activities, such as governing where and how many eggs the queen lays, replacing a
failing queen, or ensuring the production of drones. The life span of worker bees is 4 to 6 months in the
winter but only 28 to 35 days in the spring and summer.

Individual foraging bees readily discriminate between sources and normally retain a high degree of
fidelity to a single source. Differences in foraging cues such as color, aroma, and taste are often subtle,
but these modalities are handled with ease by the workers' sets of finely tuned receptor cells. Bees have
an excellent sense of direction and time. Their chronometric powers permit them to emerge from the
hive each day at the precise time a certain plant species begins to produce nectar or pollen. They also

 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/info.html (1 of 3) [1/21/2009 3:52:04 PM]
 WORKER INFO

have an excellent memory, especially for odors. After one experience they can remember for 6 days;
after three experiences they can remember for 2 weeks.

Honey bees forage between about 16'C (61'F) and 43'C (100'F). Honey bees are photonegative below
16'C; most plants do not even secrete nectar below 15.5'C (60'F). The honey bee eye, like that of many
insects, is adapted to perceive rapid movement. This exceptional visual resolution enables bees in flight
to discern the complex shapes and broken patterns of objects below, such as colored flowers against a
green background. Bees have three visual pigments in each eye that permit them to see hues in the
ultraviolet spectrum as well as the portion of the color spectrum (except red) visible to humans.

A bee collecting nectar normally makes 7 to 13 trips per day (the average is 10, the maximum recorded
is 24), spending 27 to 45 min per trip. Flight speeds average 14.8 km (9.2 mi) per hour loaded and 13 km
(8.1 mi) per hour empty. In doing so, a worker can visit as few as 5 or as many as 800 flowers in a single
trip. When filled, the honey stomach can hold up to 85 percent of the weight of the bee. Bees collecting
pollen usually take 6 to 10 minutes to gather a load, making 6 to 12 trips per day (the average is 10, the
maximum reported is 47). On a single trip a bee will visit I to 200 flowers. The weight of a pollen load
can be 20 to 33 percent of the weight of the bee. These estimates are variable, of course, and depend on
the productivity of the plant source(s) involved and the needs of the colony. Research has shown that
individual worker bees have an 804-km (500-mi) maximum lifetime flight limitation, determined by the
exhaustion of her enzymatic mechanisms of carbohydrate metabolism.

When gathering pollen, a bee often uses both mouthparts and forelegs to dislodge pollen from the flower
so that she becomes dusted with pollen. She then uses tarsal brushes on the foreleg to clean her
mouthparts and head. Following this she uses similar brushes on her middle legs to clean the forelegs
and thorax. Then with her hind legs she cleans the wings, abdomen, and middle legs. When cleaning the
middle legs the bee grasps each leg between the pollen combs of the hind legs, drawing it past the
combs. Interestingly, the result is that pollen taken from the right side of the bee is deposited in the left
comb and vice versa. Then to pack the pollen the bee uses the rastellum (rake) on the opposite leg to
clean each comb and force the pollen into the pollen press of that leg, which squeezes it (like toothpaste
from a tube) up into the pollen basket on the outside of the hind leg. Thus in the packing process, pollen
is moved from one side of the body to the other and then back again.

Since the tip of her sting is heavily barbed, the worker bee normally loses her sting when she impales an
enemy as she attacks in self-defense or in defense of the hive. Shortly thereafter she dies as a result of a
sizable loss of internal organs and tissue. If she doesn't lose her sting but empties the venom sac the
worker is unable to replenish the venom. Adult worker bees must eat pollen (bee bread), grow, and
mature before they have a full complement of venom. Venom gradually accumulates until the bees are
about 15 days old. Hence, young bees are unable to sting effectively.

Some enemies of honey bees, such as skunks, are unaffected by large numbers of stings. Others, such as
humans, may develop a hypersensitivity to the venom, which can be lethal; such people number less
than 1 or 2 percent of the world population. (Recent studies have shown that most hypersensitive people


 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/info.html (2 of 3) [1/21/2009 3:52:04 PM]
 WORKER INFO

do not react more intensively with each successive sting. Rather their level of reaction remains the same
or decreases slightly with each event.) Normally, people who work with bees and are stung routinely
eventually develop immunity to the extent that each additional sting produces only a small wheal or
minimal swelling at the site of the sting.

RETURN TO "THE WORKER"




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/info.html (3 of 3) [1/21/2009 3:52:04 PM]
DRONE




                                                          THE HEAD




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/head.html [1/21/2009 3:52:05 PM]
DRONE




                                                     THE THORAX




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/thorax.html [1/21/2009 3:52:06 PM]
DRONE




                                                 THE ABDOMEN




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/abdomen.html [1/21/2009 3:52:06 PM]
 Info




                                                 THE DRONE
                                                        DRONES ARE PRODUCED
                                                        PARTHENOGENETICALLY (that is, from
                                                        unfertilized eggs) and have a grand-father but no
                                                        father. As a consequence, drones are haploid,
                                                        having only one set of chromosomes (N =16) as
                                                        opposed to two sets for queens and workers (N =
                                                        32). Development from egg to adult requires 24
                                                        days. These male honey bees, broader and heavier
                                                        than queens, are defenseless, do not forage, and to
                                                        a great extent are dependent on worker bees for
                                                        their daily needs. Early in their adult life drones
are fed by workers but later in life they feed themselves on honey stored in the hive. In cooler climates,
drones are normally present only during the summer months and their life span is only about 2 :months.
Late in the fall they are driven out of the hive by workers preparing for winter and eventually die due to
starvation, exposure, or predation.

The drone's sole purpose for being is mating and, if successful, his reward is death. Drones have highly
developed sense organs for mating. These include large eyes capable of nearly 360' vision with many
ultraviolet receptors that enable a pursuing drone to silhouette the queen against skylight. Drones also
have highly modified antennae for detecting the scent of the queen. They are sexually mature after 10 to
12 days and may embark on as many as 25 flights during a lifetime. Each flight lasts about 30 to 60 min.

When the weather is favorable, groups of airborne drones called comets gather to await passage of a
queen on a mating flight. The congregation areas are characterized by particular air currents and
landmarks. Drones locate the queen by her scent and, using their powerful wings, chase her. Eventually
one catches the queen, and they copulate in flight. Air pressure from the abdominal respiratory system
expels the male genitalia. An audible "pop" signals a successful mating and the demise of the drone,
which falls to the ground.

Worker bees may develop functional ovaries and produce unfertilized eggs that develop into drones.
These drones will be full sized if raised in drone-sized cells but much smaller if raised in worker cells.
All are sexually functional.




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/info.html [1/21/2009 3:52:09 PM]
figa1.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa1.html [1/21/2009 3:52:10 PM]
figa2.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa2.html [1/21/2009 3:52:11 PM]
figa3.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa3.html [1/21/2009 3:52:12 PM]
figa4.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa4.html [1/21/2009 3:52:13 PM]
figa5.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa5.html (1 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:52:14 PM]
figa5.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa5.html (2 of 2) [1/21/2009 3:52:14 PM]
figa6.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa6.html [1/21/2009 3:52:15 PM]
figa7.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa7.html [1/21/2009 3:52:16 PM]
figa8.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa8.html [1/21/2009 3:52:16 PM]
figa9.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa9.html [1/21/2009 3:52:17 PM]
figa10.html




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/other/figa10.html [1/21/2009 3:52:18 PM]
1.1




                                                                TOP TO BOTTOM: queen, worker and drone honey bees.

                                                                drawn approximatly to scale. Body hairs omitted. (X8).




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.1.html [1/21/2009 3:52:19 PM]
 1.2

                                                                 PLATE 1.2. EYES, HONEY BEE CASTES

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Worker compound eye, lateral view. The eye
                                                                 is surrounded by the short-haired gena (cheek). The dense,
                                                                 coarse, long interfacetal hairs of the eyes are apparent.
                                                                 (x31)

                                                                 MIDDLE RIGHT. Queen compound eye, lateral view.
                                                                 Compare with the top right micrograph. (x31)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Drone compound eye, lateral view.
                                                                 This and the other views of the eyes show a sizable visual
                                                                 field, which is greatest in the drone. The drone bee can see
                                                                 forward, to the side, downward, upward, and to some
                                                                 extent rearward. (x 31)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Worker, vertex of head. The antennae are
                                                                 visible (bottom of the field) but most of the other
                                                                 structures are obscured by hairs. In the upper center, the
                                                                 circular outlines of the two lateral ocelli (but not the
                                                                 median ocellus) are barely visible. (x 31)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT. Queen, vertex of head. Compare with the
                                                                 top left micrograph. The ocelli are obscured by hairs. (x 31)

BOTTOM LEFT. Drone, vertex of head. The two rounded eminences (top of thefield) are the dorsal
sectors of the compound eyes, which are contiguous in this region. In the lower center of the field are the
three ocelli (one is almost completely covered with hairs). These are located down on the face of the
drone rather than in the dorsoanterior portion of the head as in the queen and worker. The dorsal bonding
of the compound eyes has apparently displaced the ocelli. (x 31)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.2.html [1/21/2009 3:52:23 PM]
1.3




                                                                PLATE 1.3 QUEEN HEAD

                                                                Frontal View of the queen head




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.3.html [1/21/2009 3:52:24 PM]
1.4




                                                                PLATE 1.4. QUEEN EYES

                                                                TOP LEFT. Trio of queen ocelli, two lateral and one
                                                                median. Long body hairs drape over these socalled simple
                                                                eyes. (x 58)

                                                                TOP RIGHT. Higher magnification of the median ocellus.
                                                                A single lens serves as the dioptric apparatus for hundreds
                                                                of underlying photoreceptor cells. The optics are such that
                                                                no image is formed at the level of the photoreceptor cells.
                                                                ( x 600)

                                                                BOTTOM RIGHT. Survey micrograph of the queen
                                                                compound eye showing its hirsute character and the
                                                                glabrous median ocellus (top of the field). The lateral
                                                                ocelli are obscured by the angle of view and hairs. (x 50)

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT. Interfacetal hairs, which are socketed,
                                                                relatively large, and long. The depth of the focal plane is
                                                                evident, as the focus is maintained over the considerable
                                                                curved expanse of the eye. (x 496)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.4.html [1/21/2009 3:52:27 PM]
1.5




                                                                PLATE 1.5. QUEEN ANTENNA, BASE AND ELBOW

                                                                BOTTOM. Survey from the vertex of the queen head
                                                                showing the hairy hemispherical compound eye with its
                                                                array of interommatidial hairs. Both antennal bases are
                                                                present; the left scape (first antenna segment) is the
                                                                prominent short antenna segment, followed by the much
                                                                longer pedicel (the first segment after the scape), and five
                                                                flagellum segments follow thereafter, while six additional
                                                                segments are outside this field. The flagellum moves
                                                                relative to the scape by the action of two muscles that span
                                                                the pedicel and insert on the first flagellum segment. (x 53)

                                                                TOP RIGHT. Base of the scape, seated within a membrane-
                                                                lined socket that lies on the wall of the frons. Presumed
                                                                mechanoreceptive hairs are in rows on the wall of the
                                                                scape. (x 110)

                                                                TOP LEFT. Close-up of the articulation of the scape with
                                                                the antenna socket. As the antenna moves, the hairs on the
                                                                scape base may be differentially bent against the socket
                                                                side. These hairs may be mechanoreceptors that monitor
                                                                the attitude of the scape. (x 330)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.5.html [1/21/2009 3:52:29 PM]
 1.6




                                                                 PLATE 1.6. QUEEN ANTENNA SURFACE

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Last five segments of the queen
                                                                 antenna. The antenna surface is profusely covered with a
                                                                 variety of uniformly distributed sense organs. On each
                                                                 segment, usually at the proximal and distal border, are
                                                                 small clusters of pit organs, which appear as bright spots.
                                                                 (x 144)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Terminal segment of queen antenna. A few
                                                                 stout peg organs (sensilla basiconica) and stout long pegs
                                                                 are seen among the majority of sensory hairs. The plate
                                                                 organs are not visible. ( x 270)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Medial surface of the second antenna segment
                                                                 of the queen. A few pit organs show brightly. It is not
                                                                 known why these pit organs reflect more secondary
                                                                 electrons to the scanning electron microscope collector and
                                                                 therefore appear brighter. The faint circular outlines of the
                                                                 plate organs are visible. (x 330)

                                               MIDDLE LEFT. Higher magnification of the surface on
                                               the penultimate segment of the queen antenna. The bright
pit organs are relatively sparse but are aggregated. Placoid (plate) and trichoid (hair) sensilla surround
the pit organs. ( x 2,200)

BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of a plate organ and several trichoid sensilla. The crack that extends along
the outer rim of this plate organ is probably artifactual. At this magnification the subtle cuticular ribbing
relief around the organ's periphery is visible. Exquisitely small pores (not visible) line these ribs and
permit odorant molecules to enter and make contact with the sensory dendrites circumferentially arrayed
under the plate. (x 5,500)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.6.html [1/21/2009 3:52:30 PM]
 1.7




                                                                 PLATE 1.7. QUEEN HEAD, ANTERIOR VIEW

                                                                 BOTTOM. Queen head. At the base of the antennae and
                                                                 projecting downward is the roughly rectangular clypeus;
                                                                 extending in front of that is the smaller, largely rectangular
                                                                 labrum (upper lip). Both mouthparts are very hirsute.
                                                                 Along the lateral sides of the clypeus-labrum are the
                                                                 clawlike mandibles. Projecting forward from between the
                                                                 mandibles are the galea and behind these are the labial
                                                                 lobes. (x 56)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Queen mouthparts, dorsoanterior view. Here
                                                                 the mandibles are better outlined and part of their
                                                                 articulation with the genae is visible. At this viewing angle
                                                                 the labrum completely covers the galea and labial lobes. (x
                                                                 41)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Medioproximal surface of the mandible
                                                                 where it adjoins the clypeus. Over 40 small, socketed hairs
                                                                 (possibly mechanoreceptors) make contact with the sides
                                                                 of the clypeus in normal mastication. If these hairs are
                                                                 innervated and mechanosensory in nature, they could
                                                                 monitor the attitude of the mandible relative to that of the
clypeus-labrum. ( x 438)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.7.html [1/21/2009 3:52:33 PM]
1.8




                                                                PLATE 1.8. QUEEN TENTORIAL PITS

                                                                TOP. Frontal view of antennae (top) and the clypeus with
                                                                labrum (bottom). Two anterior tentorial pits (arrows), lying
                                                                on the epistomal sulcus, are cannular (tubular) structures
                                                                that extend inward to form part of the tentorium (internal
                                                                skeleton) of the head. The latter provides general structural
                                                                support and cuticular braces for muscle attachment. (x 90)

                                                                BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of the right anterior tentorial
                                                                pit. This is one of the openings of the two hollow cuticular
                                                                tubes that extend through to the posterior tentorial pits. (x
                                                                600)

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of the queen right
                                                                anterior tentorial pit. ( x 750)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.8.html [1/21/2009 3:52:35 PM]
1.9




                                                                PLATE 1.9. QUEEN PROBOSCIS, LATERAL VIEW

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT. Sharply bent glossa (tongue). Over half
                                                                the length of the glossa, the principal feature of this
                                                                micrograph, is covered by the embracing proximal
                                                                segments of the labial palps. The labial palps terminate in a
                                                                pair of budlike appendages that appear to be sensory in
                                                                nature. The most extended appendage is the glossa. (x 65)

                                                                BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of the terminus of the labial
                                                                palp. Each "bud" has two segments and bears short
                                                                cuticular spines and pegs, which may be sensors for taste
                                                                and touch. (x 180)

                                                                TOP LEFT. Proximal portion of the glossa and labial
                                                                palps. The mandibles with their naked tips incompletely
                                                                cover the glossa and the hairy labrum abuts and somewhat
                                                                overhangs the paraglossae. (x 65)

                                                                TOP RIGHT. Base of the mandible (bottom) where it
                                                                articulates with (hinges on) the gena (top). An array of tiny
                                                                cuticular denticles is visible on the intersegmental
                                                                "membrane" (x 169)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.9.html [1/21/2009 3:52:37 PM]
 1.10




                                                                 PLATE 1.10. QUEEN MOUTHPARTS, POSTERIOR
                                                                 VIEW

                                                                 TOP. Mouthparts, posterior view. The innermost
                                                                 projecting piece represents the retracted glossa (tongue),
                                                                 which is much smaller than that of the worker. Distally the
                                                                 glossa is tipped by a (brightappearing) flabellum. At the
                                                                 base of the glossa are the bilobed paraglossae; these two
                                                                 pieces emanate from a flattened sclerite called the
                                                                 prementurn. Immediately lateral to the glossa are the two
                                                                 foursegmented labial palps. The one on the right of the
                                                                 glossa has been bent back to better display the underlying
                                                                 maxillary galea. When feeding, the two palps and the two
                                                                 galea come together to form a tube or funnel through
                                                                 which liquids are drawn up by the mechanical movements
                                                                 of the glossa and the suction created by the cibarium (not
                                                                 visible). (x 56)

                                                BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the underside
                                                of the queen glossa showing its bilobed construction,
                                                flabellum at the tip, and the sparse hairs (sensilla chaetica)
                                                of the lateral-lying labial palp. A few very short pegs
                                                (sensilla basiconica) are seen near the sensilla chaetica. Of
particular interest is the high density and overlapping (at the tips) nature of the sensilla chaetica on the
glossa. (x 121)

BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of the underside of the left labial palp showing the two types of putative
chemoreceptor sensilla, sensilla chaetica (the longer hairs) and sensilla basiconica (the very short but
stout hairs). (x 327)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.10.html [1/21/2009 3:52:40 PM]
1.11




                                                                PLATE 1.11. QUEEN MOUTHPARTS , LABIAL PALP

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT TWO distalmost segments of the labial
                                                                palp. Less than a dozen sense organs are at the tip. (x388)

                                                                BOTTOM RIGHT Tip of the penultiniate labial palp
                                                                segment and the base of the apical segment.
                                                                Chenioreceptor and/or mechanoreceptor hairs arise at the
                                                                base of the distal segment. ( x 1,068)

                                                                TOP Articulation between the first and second segments of
                                                                the queen labial palp. Peg organs and sensilla chaetica are
                                                                obvious features. Cuticular scales (probably uninnervated)
                                                                are circumferentially arrayed. (x 1,333)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.11.html [1/21/2009 3:52:42 PM]
 1.12




                                                                 PLATE 1.12. QUEEN HEAD POSTERIOR VIEW

                                                                 BOTTOM Proboscis and other mouthparts posterior view
                                                                 of the head. The mouthparts are extended forward. Most
                                                                 structures in the other micrographs of this plate are visible
                                                                 in this field. The arrow points to the maxillary palp. ( x 40)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Head, posterior view. The large opening
                                                                 (lop) is the foramen magnum, to which is attached the
                                                                 cervix (or neck, through which pass the nerve cord, aorta,
                                                                 and esophagus as they span the head to the thorax). The
                                                                 opposing crescent-shaped apertures flanking the basal part
                                                                 of the foramen are the posterior tentorial pits. At the base
                                                                 of the foramen is the triangular postmentum, which is
                                                                 situated atop the bilobed prementum. Embracing the latter
                                                                 are the stipes and galea. Here the mouthparts are retracted
                                                                 beneath the head. (x 37)

                                                                 TOP LEFT Higher magnification of the postmentum
                                                                 region. Flanking each side of the postmentum is the cardo.
                                                                 ( x 112)

                                                BOTTOM LEFT Maxillary palp. This largely unadorned
structure is without obvious cuticular sensilla. Possibly the "blebs" are campaniform sensilla. ( x 564)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.12.html [1/21/2009 3:52:45 PM]
1.13




                                                                PLATE 1.13. QUEEN CERVIX, HEAD DETACHED

                                                                TOP RIGHT. Occipital foramen on the posterior of the
                                                                head. This hole communicates with the cervix (neck),
                                                                which in turn attaches to the prothorax. On each side of the
                                                                foramen are the posterior tentorial pits, which extend to the
                                                                posterior tentorial bridge within the head. Between pit and
                                                                foramen is the lateral occipital sclerite with its rows of
                                                                mechanoreceptive hairs. (x 66)

                                                                TOP LEFT. Close-up of the left posterior tentorial pit. At
                                                                the extreme uppermost edge and below near the lower
                                                                right edge of the pit are smaller depressions associated
                                                                with the dorsal and ventral bridges. (x 198)

                                                                MIDDLE. Ventral aspect of the bilobed cervical
                                                                membrane, which is covered with short cuticular spines.
                                                                ( x 540)

                                                                BOTTOM. Close-up of these cuticular spines on the
                                                                bilobed portion of the cervix. Up to 20 blunt, short,
                                                                fingerlike processes may emanate from each scale at its
                                                                distal end. (x 5,400)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.13.html [1/21/2009 3:52:48 PM]
1.14




                                                                PLATE 1.14. QUEEN CERVIX

                                                                TOP Ventral cervix (neck) region showing the rather
                                                                narrow and mombranous character of the cervix, which
                                                                connects the head to the rounded right and left episternal
                                                                plates of the thorax (bottom) The surface of the cervix is
                                                                studded with circumferentially arranged, tiny cuticular
                                                                scales. (x 90)

                                                                BOTTOM Dorsal cervix region. The cervix, with several
                                                                folds and covered with small cuticular studs, visibly
                                                                connects the prescutum of the thorax (bottom) to the
                                                                occipital region of the head. (x 67)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.14.html [1/21/2009 3:52:51 PM]
1.15




                                                                PLATE 1.15. QUEEN CERVIX, CLOSE-UP

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT Dorsoposterior view (viewed obliquely)
                                                                of the postocciput of the queen where the head joins the
                                                                darker-appearing membranous cervix (neck). Long body
                                                                hairs cover the thorax. The arrow indicates an area further
                                                                magnified in the top left micrograph. ( x 84)

                                                                TOP LEFT Lateral occipital sclerite (hair plate) (arrow in
                                                                the bottom left micrograph) bearing putative
                                                                mechanoreceptor hairs that are bent when this plate
                                                                touches the episternum of the prothorax. In bending, these
                                                                hairs inform the central nervous system of the angle of the
                                                                head relative to the rest of the body. (x 912)

                                                                RIGHT Higher magnification of the cuticular scales
                                                                adorning the membranous cervix. The adaptive value of
                                                                these scales and their short, pectinate processes is
                                                                unknown at present. (x 2,200)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.15.html [1/21/2009 3:52:53 PM]
1.16




                                                                PLATE 1.16. QUEEN

                                                                QUEEN THORAX Posterior region bearing the relatively
                                                                large oval spiracle (arrow) is actually the first segment of
                                                                the abdomen (see also Plate 1.36) although it is broadly
                                                                fused to the thorax.




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.16.html [1/21/2009 3:52:54 PM]
1.17




                                                                PLATE 1.17. QUEEN WINGS

                                                                Photomontage of the proximal third of the forewing and its
                                                                associated plates at the point of the wing's articulation with
                                                                the thorax (the head Is to the top, dorsum to the right).
                                                                Visible at the wing hinge area is the largest plate, the
                                                                tegula, which is closest to the body. Above the tegula and
                                                                to the left is the humeral plate; to the right is the median
                                                                plate, which seemingly communicates with the vannal vein
                                                                (the stout vein that projects approximately through the
                                                                center of the wing in this viewing angle). The high density
                                                                and fine character of the microtrichia covering the wing
                                                                surface is evident. Despite its rather stiff appearance, the
                                                                wing is remarkably flexible and resilient, capable of
                                                                propelling the bee at speeds of over 20 km per hour. With
                                                                their wings "disengaged" and folded back over the body,
                                                                queens are able to vibrate their wing muscles to produce
                                                                the sounds known as piping or quacking. (x 34)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.17.html [1/21/2009 3:52:56 PM]
1.18




                                                                PLATE 1.18. QUEEN WING BASES

                                                                MIDDLE Wing base detail (the head is to the left).
                                                                Numerous proprioceptors are evident on the various
                                                                sclerotized pleural plates adjacent to the wing bases. The
                                                                function of the pores that are visible is not known. (x 85)

                                                                TOP LEFT Pleural region beneath the hind wing. Many
                                                                branched hairs emanate from sockets. (x432)

                                                                TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of shallow pores in the
                                                                cuticle. (x 4,400)

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT. Wing sclerite with branched, acutely
                                                                tipped body hairs and relatively short trichoid sensilla. The
                                                                sensilla may be innervated and if so might serve as
                                                                external proprioceptors. Pores are visible along the trailing
                                                                margin. (x 360)

                                                                BOTTOM RIGHT Sheared trichoid. An apparent lumen is
                                                                in the hair shaft. (x 5,500)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.18.html [1/21/2009 3:52:58 PM]
1.19




                                                                PLATE 1.19. QUEEN FOREWING BASE

                                                                TOP Forewing base showing a variety of hair types. Some
                                                                functional inferences can be drawn, based on the size and
                                                                position of the hairs. Short and long trichoid sensilla may
                                                                have an exoreceptive function and respond (bend) to wind
                                                                shear forces. The long ones may also be proprioceptive in
                                                                nature if they contact the pleural surface when the wing is
                                                                upright and inform the central nervous system of wing
                                                                attitude. The body hairs are probably not innervated.
                                                                Chemosensory pit organs are also present. Behind the pits
                                                                (lop) is an axillary sclerite that articulates with a portion of
                                                                the pleuron. (x270)

                                                                BOTTOM Higher magnification of the pits and short
                                                                trichoids at the wing base. A pit in the lower center of the
                                                                field appears to have a recessed dome (arrow) and may be
                                                                a campaniform sensillum. The hair and the pit may both
                                                                house sensory neurons capable of monitoring the wing
                                                                flexion. (x 3,600)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.19.html [1/21/2009 3:53:00 PM]
 1.16




                                                                 PLATE 1.20. QUEEN WING BASE MEMBRANES

                                                                 TOP LEFT Forewing base and stub of the hind wing
                                                                 (center right of //I(, field Interesting lateral membranous
                                                                 areas in the middle of the field (arrows) are in higher
                                                                 magnification in the other three micrographs of this plate
                                                                 (see also Plates 1.18, 1.19, 1.21, and 1.22). (x 55)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Rosettelike cuticular spines at the wing
                                                                 base arrayed in rows with high-relief, cuticular sculpturing
                                                                 between these spine clusters (left arrow hi top left
                                                                 micrograph (x 23,400)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Pleural surface beneath the hind wing base
                                                                 (right arrow in top left micrograph). Acutely tipped spines
                                                                 rise from a surface covered with small cuticular knobs. (x
                                                                 2,200)

                                               BOTTOM RIGHT Pleural membrane at the base of the
                                               forewing (center arrow in top left micrograph) Elsewhere
on the body cuticular sculpturing is characterized by more prominent (than in the top right micrograph),
short, stout spines in furrows between rows of taller spines. The cuticular surface is covered with a series
of low-lying ridges. ( x 23,800)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.20.html [1/21/2009 3:53:02 PM]
1.21




                                                                PLATE 1.21. QUEEN WING ARTICULATION

                                                                BOTTOM. Articulation at the queen wing base. The
                                                                leading marginal veins of the forewing and hind wing
                                                                pivot from axillary sclerites and project diagonally in this
                                                                micrograph. A portion of the ventral wing membrane
                                                                (center of the field) possesses no hairs but rather has low-
                                                                lying cuticular protrusions and multipeaked ridges (top
                                                                micrograph). (x 95)

                                                                TOP. Forewing base. The underside of the wing exhibits
                                                                several types of cuticular rugosites. The function of this
                                                                surface relief is not known. (x 5,100)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.21.html [1/21/2009 3:53:04 PM]
 1.22




                                                                 PLATE 1.22. QUEEN WING BASE SCLEROTIZED
                                                                 PLATES

                                                                 TOP LEFT Base of the forewing (the head is to the tipper
                                                                 left). The hairy tegula partly covers the triangular humeral
                                                                 plate.

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Hair plate of socketed (presumed)
                                                                 mechanoreceptors on the interior edge of the humeral
                                                                 plate. Electron beam damage probably caused the bending
                                                                 and twisting of hairs. Rotational movements of the tegula
                                                                 and hurneral plate bend these hairs; if innervated, they
                                                                 could monitor such dislocations. ( x 66)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT Another view of the forewing base
                                                                 showing the upraised humeral plate. The arrows point to
                                                                 structures shown in far higher magnification cation on the
                                                                 bottom left, bottom right, and middle right micrographs
                                                                 ( X 1'5 0)

                                               BOTTOM Close-tip of the radius vein. Branched hairs
                                               emanate from this part of the wing base. Structures
                                               surrounding this vein base are visible in the middle left
micrograph, indicated by the left arrow. (x 2,600)

MIDDLE RIGHT. Condylelike projection at the wing base with hairs aparentlyly in contact with the
wing margin. Hairs project at different levels and angles from this knob. These hairs, if innervated, may
be mechanoreceptors recording wing beat frequency and/or tension and flexion of the wings. A low-
magnification view of this structure in relation to other wing structures is in the middle left micrograph
(right arrow) ( x 300)

BOTTOM RIGHT High-magnification view of a fascicle of about 20 socketed hairs in a cuticular
protuberance at the wing base. Features adjacent to this structure are visible in the middle left
micrograph (middle arrow) These hairs, if innervated, may be m echan o receptors monitoring a single
kind of temporal displacement, such as the upstroke or downstroke of the wing. ( x 60)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.22.html [1/21/2009 3:53:06 PM]
 1.23




                                                                 PLATE 1.23. QUEEN W1NG HOOKS

                                                                 TOP. Hooks on the hind wing close to the thickened base
                                                                 of the articulating forewing. Particularly apparent are the
                                                                 hind-wing hairs on the leading edge of the hind wing
                                                                 (compare with peg organs of the worker, Plate 2.23).
                                                                 These hairs project forward and are found on either side of
                                                                 the 15 hooks. (x 170)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT. Higher magnification of the trailing edge
                                                                 of the forewing clasped by the wing hooks in flight. The
                                                                 hairs adjacent to the trailing vein of the forewing are
                                                                 socketed and may be mechanoreceptors capable of sensing
                                                                 the attack angle of the wings. The bent tips of a few hairs
                                                                 may have been caused by electron beam damage. ( x 480)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Hooks on the leading edge of the hind
                                                                 wing, each with a slightly forked terminus. The bent and
                                                                 twisted nature of the hook is apparent from this angle; in
                                                                 three dimensions the hook extends in two directions. (x
                                                                 605)

                                              BOTTOM RIGHT. Enlargement of the middle hook in the
bottom left micrograph. The socket for the hook is less pronounced than that of the worker and no peg
organs are present, only socketed microtrichia that may be capable of monitoring the proximity of the
wings. (x 1,210)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.23.html [1/21/2009 3:53:08 PM]
 1.24




                                                                 PLATE 1.24. QUEEN FOREWING SURFACE

                                                                 TOP LEFT Dorsal surface of the forewing showing a
                                                                 dense population of short, slender, socketed hairs that may
                                                                 be mechanoreceptors that provide aerodynamic sense, that
                                                                 is, monitor the vector and magnitude of air currents over
                                                                 the wing surface. (x 550)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Higher magnification of a single hair,
                                                                 revealing an oval rather than round socket. Presumably the
                                                                 hair's flexion is confined to the long axis of the oval so it
                                                                 can record wind in one axis only. (x 3,300)

                                                                 .MIDDLE. Ventral surface of the forewing. The setae are
                                                                 less dense than on the dorsal surface. If innervated, some
                                                                 unsocketed hairs may be chemoreceptors. (x 510)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Three unsocketed setae on the ventral
                                                                 side of the forewing. (x 1,100)

                                              BOTTOM RIGHT. Socketed seta on the ventral side of the
                                              forewing vein. The tip can not be resolved well, but its
bulbous nature suggests a terminal pore. If so, this hair is
probably a chemoreceptor. (x 5,500)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.24.html [1/21/2009 3:53:10 PM]
1.25




                                                                PLATE 1.25. QUEEN HIND WING SURFACE

                                                                TOP LEFT. Dorsal surface of the hind wing. Numerous
                                                                hairs are evenly spaced over the surface. Wing hooks are
                                                                visible on the leading edge of the wing. (x 168)

                                                                TOP RIGHT Close-up of the wing in the top left
                                                                micrograph. Socketed hairs arise from the vein and
                                                                nonsocketed hairs are in the membranous, interveinal area.
                                                                Veins are often conduits for nerves, so the socketed hairs
                                                                may be innervated and have a mechanoreceptor function.
                                                                (x 800)

                                                                BOTTOM LEFT. Ventral surface of the hind wing. The
                                                                sparse, scattered, nonsocketed hairs give the appearance of
                                                                peg organs (sensiIla basiconica).(x 450)

                                                                BOTTOM RIGHT Higher magnification of a hair, which
                                                                looks like a grooved peg, on the ventral hind wing. Such
                                                                hairs may be chemoreceptors. The depression or pit
                                                                (bottom) delimits the base of a hair on the opposite side of
                                                                the wing. ( x 4,200)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.25.html [1/21/2009 3:53:12 PM]
 1.26




                                                                 PLATE 1.26. QUEEN PROTHORACIC SPIRACLE

                                                                 Top. Prothoracic spiracle, which lies beneath the spiracular
                                                                 lobe, or hairy plate (arrow) (the head is to the top left of
                                                                 this oblique view). The forewing base is visible (upper
                                                                 right). This spiracle is protected by the spiracular lobe and
                                                                 shrouded with body hairs, which must be removed, as in
                                                                 the other micrographs in this plate, before the spiracle and
                                                                 its interior can be observed. (x 56)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Portion of the spiracular lobe, the atrium
                                                                 of this spiracle, and its immediate interior. This area is
                                                                 revealed when the hairs are removed from the thorax and a
                                                                 superficial slice of cuticle is taken from this region. (x
                                                                 1,500)

                                                                 MIDDLE RIGHT. Close-up of the tracheal atrium
                                                                 revealing the airway without any of its cuticular overcoats.
                                                                 The inner wall of the atrium has cuticular ridges from
                                                                 which project small spines or hairs, which support the
                                                                 integumental "pocket" concept of the atrium. The tracheal
                                                                 opening has been removed. (x 300)

BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the cuticular hairs and ridges of the atrium of the
prothoracic spiracle. The cuticular reticulum extends along the floor of the atrium. (x 1,200)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.26.html [1/21/2009 3:53:14 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.27.html

1.27

                                                                 PLATE 1.27. QUEEN FORELEG

                                                                 BOTTOM. Photomontage of the prothoracic leg (foreleg).
                                                                 The three main segments of the leg (distal to proximal) are
                                                                 the tarsus, tibia, and the femur (the largest of the three). At
                                                                 the proximal end of the tarsus (basitarsus) is the sharply
                                                                 notched "antenna cleaner." A closing lobe (fibula) or spur
                                                                 extends to partly cover the notch. In grooming, the antenna
                                                                 is passed repeatedly through this notch to clean the sensory
                                                                 hairs and plates of the antenna. (x34)

                                                                 TOP LEFT Prothoracic leg bases (legs removed; head is to
                                                                 the top). The two empty coxal cavi ties are side by side.
                                                                 The tips of the maxillae (top) are situated between the
                                                                 coxal cavities. (x 60)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the intersegmental
                                                                 membrane between the trochanter and femur. The
                                                                 irregularly furrowed character of this surface is interesting,
                                                                 as are the unsocketed, tiny teatlike cuticular spurs. ( x
                                                                 2,400)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.27.html [1/21/2009 3:53:16 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.28.html

1.28

                                                                 PLATE 1.28. QUEEN FORELEG, CLOSE-UP

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Survey of the basal portion of the leg. The
                                                                 segments (from left to right) are the basitarsus, tibia, and
                                                                 (projecting at a 45' angle to the tibia) the femur. The
                                                                 "beak" at the end of the tibia is the fibula. ( x 3 1)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT. Basitarsus (left), which articulates with
                                                                 the tibia. The lobe on the tibia is the fibula, which closes
                                                                 over the haired notch for antenna cleaning. (x 120)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Antenna cleaner, or comb. This
                                                                 semicircular fringe of stiff hairs is located on the basitarsus
                                                                 at its junction with the tibia. The antenna is pulled past
                                                                 these hairs to remove debris. When the foreleg is flexed,
                                                                 the notch with hairs is overlaid by the short fibula, forming
                                                                 a cuticular circle that enables all sides of the antenna to be
                                                                 cleaned at once. ( x 384)

                                              BOTTOM RIGHT Posterior portion of the femur-tibla
                                              Joint of the foreleg. (x 144) close-up of the cuticular relief
                                              and the short spurs that adorn the back of the femur-tibia
joint (intersegmental membrane). A comparison of this
field with the corresponding area in the bottom right micrograph shows the limited area over which this
kind of cuticular ornamentation occurs. (x 168)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.28.html [1/21/2009 3:53:18 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.29.html

1.29

                                                                 PLATE 1.29. QUEEN MIDDLE AND HIND LEG
                                                                 BASES

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Ventral view of the middle and hind (rig t)
                                                                 leg bases. The coxae and trochanters of the bind
                                                                 (metathoracic) legs are on the right, those of the middle
                                                                 (mesothoracic) legs on the left. The rectangular plate
                                                                 between both sets of legs is the sternellum. The
                                                                 rhomboidal plate bounded by the four leg bases is the
                                                                 propodeal sternum; it is punctuated by a center apodeme.
                                                                 (x 47)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Ventral view of the base of the
                                                                 metahtoracic leg. The major appendage here is the
                                                                 metathoracic coxa. The distal appendage that projects to
                                                                 the bottom of the field is the trochanter. ( x 55)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Sternal sclerite situated between the
                                                                 metathoracic coxae. This plate is more properly called the
                                                                 propodeal sternum. ( x 50)

                                               MIDDLE LEFT Higher magnification of the propodeal
sternum and the adjoining coxae of the mesothoracic legs.
The hair plates (arrow) at the bases of the coxae are probably mechanoreceptors monitoring leg
movement. (x 100)

BOTTOM LEFT Apodeme (cuticular invagination) and the surrounding propodeal sternum. ( x 300)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.29.html [1/21/2009 3:53:20 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.30.html

1.30

                                                                 PLATE 1.30.QUEEN MIDDLE LEG BASES

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Thorax, ventral view. The middle
                                                                 (mesothoracic) coxae are on the extreme right, one above
                                                                 the other. The groove (line) running side to side through
                                                                 the middle of the field is the median sulcus. This division
                                                                 separates the right mesosternum and mesoepisternum from
                                                                 its left counterpart. The arrow points to one of the
                                                                 "pincushion" structures further magnified in the top right
                                                                 and top left micrographs. ( x 40)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the left coxa in the
                                                                 bottom right micrograph. The "eyelid" cuticular structure
                                                                 is an intersegmental membrane, and at the extreme basal
                                                                 portion of the field is a small portion of the coxal condyle.
                                                                 Immediately above the condyle (arrow) is the "pincushion"
                                                                 structure indicated by the arrow in the bottom right
                                                                 micrograph: this structure is even further magnified in the
                                                                 top left micrograph. (x 96)

                                            TOP LEFT Forty-odd tiny setae. This may be a collection
                                            of inechanoreceptors (making up a hair plate), whose
                                            probable function is to irionitor leg loading and position by
spine displacement through coxal contact with the basal margin of the mesosternum ( x 664)

BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of one of the two hairless areas visible (at 7 and 11 o'clock) in
the survey of the upper ven ter of the thorax in the bottom right micrograph. No cuticular hairs exist in
this (the 7 o'clock) area nor are there any empty sockets or other indications of cuticular sensilla. Also
absent is the normal cuticular relief. The function, if any, of these areas remains a mystery. (x 208)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.30.html [1/21/2009 3:53:22 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.31.html

1.31

                                                                 PLATE 1.31. QUEEN MIDDLE LEG BASE

                                                                 TOP Close-up of the leg base and coxal cavity of the
                                                                 middle leg. The articulating (intersegmental) "membrane"
                                                                 is characteristically covered with rows of tiny spinelike
                                                                 processes. (x 324)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of the cuticular spines arising
                                                                 from the intersegmental "membrane" between the
                                                                 mesothoracic coxa and trochanter of the queen. The
                                                                 linearity of the rows of these spines is apparent in this
                                                                 view. (x 4,800)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of one of the unsocketed
                                                                 spines showing its general morphology and blunt tip. (x
                                                                 18,000)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.31.html [1/21/2009 3:53:24 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.32.html

1.32

                                                                 PLATE 1.32. QUEEN MIDDLE AND HIND LEGS

                                                                 Photomontage of the middle, or mesothoracic (left), and
                                                                 hind, or metathoracic (right) legs. At the leg base the first
                                                                 segment, the coxa, is almost completely obscured by the
                                                                 hairs of the mesothoracic pleurites. The next segment, the
                                                                 trochanter, is visible, extending (horizontally) to articulate
                                                                 with the larger femur. The tibia joins the femur (at the
                                                                 "knee") and extends downward. The mesothoracic tibia is
                                                                 about as wide as the femur, but the hind tibia is flattened
                                                                 and much broader. The second downward-projecting
                                                                 segment is the basal tarsomere, which is clearly much
                                                                 larger than the other, more distal tarsal segments. In the
                                                                 queen the metathoracic basal tarsomere lacks the pollen
                                                                 collection apparatus of its counterpart in the worker (see
                                                                 Plates 2.28, 2.29, 2.30, and 2.31). Four remaining tarsal
                                                                 segments are present; the last one (pretarsus) is elongate
                                                                 and bears claws. These first four tarsal segments have no
                                                                 muscles, but a common tendon traverses all of them and
                                                                 inserts into the flexor muscle of the pretarsus. ( x 28)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.32.html [1/21/2009 3:53:25 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.33.html

1.33

                                                                 PLATE 1.33. QUEEN MIDDLE LEG

                                                                 TOP LEFT Articulation between coxa and trochanter of
                                                                 the middle leg. (x 140)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Digitiform, scale-covered cuticular spur at
                                                                 the tibia-basitarsus joint. ( x 31)

                                                                 BOTTOM Higher magnification of the tiny spur in the top
                                                                 right micrograph. It appears to arise from the
                                                                 intersegmental membrane between the two leg segments.
                                                                 This miniscule, pineconelike spine may be an external
                                                                 proprioceptor-mechanoreceptor that monitors leg flexion
                                                                 or torque. The comparable appendage in worker bees is
                                                                 called the wax spur (see Plate 2.27). ( x 360)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.33.html [1/21/2009 3:53:27 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.34.html

1.34

                                                                 PLATE 1.34. QUEEN FOREFOOT AND HINDFOOT

                                                                 TOP Pretarsus of the metathoracic (hind) leg. Its two main
                                                                 features are the paired claws surrounding the toung like
                                                                 like arolium. About a half dozen long, large, curved hairs
                                                                 project backward from the median sclerite. At the base of
                                                                 the arolium, and projecting proximally (leftward), is the
                                                                 planta, which is covered with spines that extend distally.
                                                                 The unguitractor, which is not well displayed in this field,
                                                                 is located to the left of the planta. The medial surface of
                                                                 each bilobed claw has several ranks of fine hairs and a few
                                                                 chaeticalike sensilla. (x270) Metathoracic pretarsus facing
                                                                 the viewer, dorsal side up.

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGT The median sclerite is visible, along with
                                                                 the stout spines that issue from it. Several different forms
                                                                 of hair are present on the base of the last tarsal segment
                                                                 (top). (x 168)

                                               BOTTOM LEFT Spiny arolium. As the claws relax, the
                                               arolium assumes the pursed shape. When the claws are
                                               active and extended, the arolium is drawn upward and
                                               spreads out between the claws. The bee uses this fleshy
lobe to grip surfaces that cannot be penetrated or grasped by the claws. (x 378)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.34.html [1/21/2009 3:53:29 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.36.html

1.36

                                                                 PLATE 1.36. QUEEN ABDOMEN

                                                                 Gaster (abdomen), which consists of a first, rather
                                                                 indistinct segment (attached to the thoracic region) with a
                                                                 prominent spiracle, the petiole (waist), and the remaining
                                                                 posterior gaster segments. The dark spots indicate the
                                                                 relative position of spiracles on the first abdominal
                                                                 segment and on that portion of the abdomen behind the
                                                                 petiole. There is one spiracle on each side of the first seven
                                                                 segments (see also Plate 1.16).




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.36.html [1/21/2009 3:53:30 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.37.html

1.37

                                                                 PLATE 1.37. QUEEN I- PETIOLE LATE PAL AND
                                                                 VENTRAL VIEWS

                                                                 TOP LEFT Lateral view of the petiolar region, or "waist,"
                                                                 the constricted area between the first and second
                                                                 abdominal segments. On the left is the "bump" of the
                                                                 propedeum (first abdominal tergal plate); on the right,
                                                                 across the narrow petiolar isthmus, is the second
                                                                 abdominal tergite. The 1, saddle" between the two
                                                                 segments is the membranous roof of the petiole pocket. ( x
                                                                 6 1)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Close-up of the petiole. Immediately
                                                                 below and on the left is the first abdominal sternite. On the
                                                                 right is the second abdominal sternite. ( x 2 10)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Ventral view of the petiole. A membranous
                                                                 area divides the ringlike first abdominal sternite (left) from
                                                                 the cuticular ring that is the second abdominal sternite. (x
                                                                 55)

                                                BOTTOM RIGHT Petiolar region. On the right is the
ringlike second abdominal sternite. Projecting leftward
from that sternite is the wrinkled and flexible intersegmental membrane. (x 175)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.37.html [1/21/2009 3:53:32 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.38.html

1.38

                                                                 PLATE 1.38. QUEEN PETIOLE, DORSAL VIEW

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Dorsal view of the essentially hairless petiole.
                                                                 The dark vertical sector (with one socketed cuticular hair)
                                                                 is the posterior portion of the mesoscutellum The
                                                                 intersegmental membrane spanning the propodeum and
                                                                 second abdominal tergite appears as a trilobed structure. (x
                                                                 140)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT. Tangential orientation of the petiole (the
                                                                 head is to the top). The numerous cuticular spines in the
                                                                 interseginental membrane are in a somewhat ordered array.
                                                                 (x 150)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of the multipeaked
                                                                 cuticular spines on the intersegmental membrane of the
                                                                 petiolar region. The interspine areas have a low-lying
                                                                 bumpy texture. ( x 2,600)

                                              TOP RIGHT Petiolar region (the head is to the left). The
                                              propodeum has been tipped forward so that its full
                                              posterior extent is visible as it attaches to the gaster
(abdomen). The slender petiolar attachment is the vital
linkage that connects the spherical thorax (with the first abdominal segment) with the even more
massive gaster. (x 66)

MIDDLE RIGHT. Dorsal view of the interseginental membrane of the petiolar region (the head is to the
upper left). Compare this micrograph with its left side counterpart in the bottom right micrograph (x
175)

BOTTOM RIGHT Lateral view of the petiolar region. At the extreme lower right (arrow) is the dorsal
portion of the second abdominal spiracle. (x 60)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.38.html [1/21/2009 3:53:34 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.39.html

1.39

                                                                 PLATE 1.39. QUEEN ABDOMINAL SPIRACLES

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Survey of the pleural portion of the first and
                                                                 second abdominal segments. The small spiracular
                                                                 apertures (one per segment) (arrow) are obscured by
                                                                 extensive hair cover. (x31)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. First abdominal spiracle on the
                                                                 propodeal segment of the thorax. This is the largest
                                                                 spiracle (along with its opposite side twin). Its elevated
                                                                 cuticular rim surrounds a shallow atrium, and the interior
                                                                 rim is the true opening into the tracheae. The tracheae are
                                                                 closed off from the inner (interior) rim by a sizable valve,
                                                                 which is incompletely Seen here because of a thin film of
                                                                 dried material emanating from the trachea. (x 240)

                                                                 TOP RIGH T. Abdominal spiracle (upper left) With
                                                                 difficult\,, the covert and linear character of this aperture
                                                                 can be made out. ( x 37)

                                               BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of aii abdominal
                                               spiracle. A cuticular hair fence of tergal orign incompletely
covers this aperture, and several forms of hairs are present.
The inner wall of the atrium Is replete with very short hairs. ( x 360)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.39.html [1/21/2009 3:53:36 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.41.html

1.41

                                                                 PLATE 1.41. QUEEN THORAX AND ABDOMEN,
                                                                 CUTICULAR HAIRS

                                                                 TOP Portions of two terminal abdominal segments. Of
                                                                 interest is the cuticular relief that extends over these
                                                                 segments and the fringed and glabrous cuticular hairs that
                                                                 are abundant over the entire body. ( x 263)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Cuticle and cuticular hairs of a
                                                                 metathoracic pleurite. Most of these cuticular hairs are
                                                                 unfringed and unbranched, and the tips are sharply
                                                                 pointed. Some of the long branched hairs along the
                                                                 periphery of the abdominal tergites and sternites are
                                                                 attached to gland cells that may be the source of queen
                                                                 pheromone obtained by workers during grooming. (x 550)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of a cuticular hair shaft on an
                                                                 abdominal sternite. The fluted nature of the side wall is not
                                                                 artifactual, although the "blebs" on the shaft wall may be
                                                                 debris. (x 550)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.41.html [1/21/2009 3:53:38 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.42.html

1.42

                                                                 PLATE 1.42. QUEEN STING

                                                                 LEFT Photomontage showing the entire ventral surface of
                                                                 the sting. The two barbed lancets, in close apposition,
                                                                 overlay the stylet trough to form the venom channel. On
                                                                 either side are the distorted (in specimen preparation)
                                                                 sheath lobes of the sting. Each sheath lobe is extended
                                                                 proximally from beneath an oblong plate. Medial to each
                                                                 plate, near the top of the montage is a forked structure;
                                                                 each "tine" or ramus connects proximally with a triangular
                                                                 plate, which in turn is associated with a quadrate plate. The
                                                                 latter sclerite ties alongside (to the Outside of) the oblong
                                                                 plate. See the Appendix, Fig. A. 1. (x 94)

                                                                 MIDDLE RIGHT Lateral view of the abdominal tip. The
                                                                 ultimate abdominal segment seen here is number seven;
                                                                 the seventh tergal and sternal plates enclose most of the
                                                                 sting as well as segments eight to ten. The aperture through
                                                                 which eggs and feces pass when expelled from the body
                                                                 also functions as the entrance to the sting chamber. The
                                                                 fuzzy projections arising from the floor of the sting
                                                                 chamber are the tips of the sting sheath. The arrow at the
                                                                 bottom left of the field points to the area further magnified
in the bottom right micrograph. (x 31)

BOTTOM RIGHT Medial surface of the abdominal tip (ventral sclerite) revealing myraids of stout
cuticular spines (arrow in right middle micrograph) ( x 62)

TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the abdominal tip in the right middle micrograph showing the
setose condition of the sting sheath at its proximal origin. (x 250)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.42.html [1/21/2009 3:53:40 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.43.html

1.43

                                                                 PLATE 1.43. QUEEN STING. CLOSE-UP

                                                                 TOP LEFT Distal tip of the sting apparatus showing the
                                                                 terminus of the venom channel. Two barbed lancets in the
                                                                 foreground oppose each other (earlier workers reported
                                                                 that the queen sting had no barbs). Behind the lancets is
                                                                 the troughlike stylet. When stinging, the lancets slide back
                                                                 and forth on serrated tracks (lower arrow). The tracks form
                                                                 the trough at the tip of the stylet. Each thrust pulls the sting
                                                                 deeper into the victim. Both the track and the groove in
                                                                 each lancet (not visible) are serrated, probably to reduce
                                                                 friction. Note the small "indentations" (one per barb)
                                                                 (upper arrow) on the lateral margins of each lancet (see the
                                                                 top right micrograph). In comparison with worker barbs,
                                                                 the queen barbs are less formidable, which may permit the
                                                                 queen to sting repeatedly without loss of the sting. Other
                                                                 work suggests that the queen sting is covered with a
                                                                 surface lubricant while that of the worker is not. (x 1,040)

                                                TOP RIGHT Highly magnified view of the indentation
                                                indicated by the upper arrow in the top left micrograph.
                                                One indentation is associated with each barb on the lancets
                                                and stylet. This structure appears to be a campaniform
sensillum. If so, such a proprioceptor might monitor pressure generated by the relative depth of insertion
of the sting or flexion of the lancets. (x 15,000)

BOTTOM LEFT Everted lancets of the queen. The stylet is flanked by the two hairy lobes of the sting
sheath. (x 188)

BOTTOM RIGHT Masses of cuticular hair fasicles internally lining the sheath lobes. (x4,688)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.43.html [1/21/2009 3:53:41 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.44.html

1.44

                                                                 PLATE 1.44. EGG

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Egg produced by the queen bee. Both
                                                                 end,,; are rounded, and one pole seems larger than the
                                                                 other. At this magnification the cuticular relief
                                                                 characteristic for this species is barely visible, (x 110)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the egg surface
                                                                 showing, the reticulated pattern of the cuticular ridges. ( x
                                                                 400)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Close-up of the large pole of the egg
                                                                 showing the linear ridge system enclosing polygonal areas
                                                                 of the egg surface (chorion). The arrow indicates the area
                                                                 further magnified in the inset. (x 600)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT INSET. Micropyle of the egg. (x 600)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Polygonal zones on chorion. The basal
                                                                 chorion surface is randomly studded with minuscule,
                                                                 discrete bumps. (x 1,250)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/queen/1.44.html [1/21/2009 3:53:43 PM]
2.1




                                                                 PLATE 2.1 WORKER HEAD

                                                                 FRONTAL VIEW




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.1.html [1/21/2009 3:53:45 PM]
2.2




                                                                 PLATE 2.2. WORKER EYES

                                                                 TOP. Three ocelli (two lateral and one medial) on the
                                                                 dorsal portion of the head between the two compound
                                                                 eyes. Branched body hairs are abundant around these
                                                                 three photoreceptor organs. Each of the biconvex lenses
                                                                 refracts light to about 800 well-packed photoreceptor
                                                                 cells. As light monitors, these organs may regulate the
                                                                 start and finish of foraging activity as well as visually
                                                                 measure horizon versus ground to assist in maintaining
                                                                 level flight. (x 167)

                                                                 BOTTOM. Compound eye with its thousands of facets.
                                                                 Under each facet are nine photoreceptor cells, all of which
                                                                 are color receptors and some of which are capable of
                                                                 analyzing polarization patterns in the skylight. The
                                                                 conspicuous, long, interfacetal hairs are mechanoreceptors
                                                                 that inform the worker of flight speed and wind direction.
                                                                 (x 270)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.2.html [1/21/2009 3:53:47 PM]
 2.3




                                                                  PLATE 2.3. WORKER FACE

                                                                  TOP RIGHT Photomontage of frontal view of the head
                                                                  showing the elbowed character of the antennae. The three
                                                                  occlli are seen at the vertex; to the right of that cluster is
                                                                  the hairy compound eye. The anterior tentorial pit is near
                                                                  the bottom (arrow) ( x 31)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT Higher magnification of the antenna]
                                                                  bases. The antennal socket and sclerite enclose the
                                                                  bulbous base of the elongated scape (first segment) of the
                                                                  antenna. The basal surface is covered with rows of short
                                                                  (probably mechanoreceptor) hairs. Extending forward
                                                                  from the antennal base,; is the broad triangular clypeus.
                                                                  The anterior tentorial pit is visible (arrow) (x 50)

                                                                  TOP LEFT Close-up of the scape-pedicellus junction (the
                                                                  antennal elbow). The short hairs at the base of the
                                                                  pedicellus may be external proprioceptors that monitor the
                                                                  varying angle of antennal flexion as different groups of
                                                                  these hairs contact and are bent against the edge of the
                                                                  scape at given degrees of flexion. Johnston's organ (an
                                                                  auditory organ) is located within the pedicel. ( x 186)

BOTTOM LEFT Anterior tentorial pit. These cavities lie in the epistomal sulcus and are difficult to
discern at low magnification (arrows in upper right and middle left micrographs). The pits are external
manifestations of the anterior roots of the cannular tentorium, the endoskeleton of the head. (x 409)

BOTTOM LEFT Close-up of the corrugated cuticular floor and periphery of the anterior tentorial pit. ( x
1,650)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.3.html [1/21/2009 3:53:49 PM]
 2.4




                                                                  PLATE 2.4. WORKER ANTENNA

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Survey of the medial surface of the
                                                                  ultimate six (flagellar) segments. Even at this low
                                                                  magnification, very bright foci (denoting clustered pore
                                                                  sensilla) are apparent on each segment. ( x 65)

                                                                  BOTTOM MIDDLE. Higher magnification of the sixth
                                                                  antennal segment. the three bright foci are areas of' far
                                                                  greater secondary electron capture bv the microscope, and
                                                                  each bright area delimits a pore sensillum. In addition,
                                                                  numerous trichoid sensilla are visible on the right and
                                                                  many placoid sensilla are on the left. (x 702)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Antenna, posterior surface. Robust
                                                                  trichoid sensilla are sparsely distributed among slender
                                                                  short trichoid sensilla. (x 65)

                                                TOP LEFT Terminal antennal segment, dorsal view. All
                                                sensilla types known for the antenna are found here. Four
                                                pore organs are easily visible (the bright, circular spots) in
                                                the midst of many plate and trichoid seisilla (at least three
                                                types of trichoid sensilla). Electron beam damage may
have caused the curled or bent trichoid sensilla. ( x 390)

TOP RIGHT. Terminal antennal segment, ventral view. On this surface are 'at least three
morphologically different forms of trichoid sensilla. (x 312)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.4.html [1/21/2009 3:53:51 PM]
2.5




                                                                 PLATE 2.5. WORKER MOUTHPARTS

                                                                 TOP Tangential view of the ventral aspect of the head
                                                                 showing the right and left compound eyes. Most
                                                                 prominent are the crossed mandibles, which are laterally
                                                                 articulated and lie immediately beneath the oval platelike
                                                                 labrum. The mandibles appear to embrace the proximal
                                                                 portion of the glossa and surrounding galeae (of
                                                                 maxillae), which are folded back beneath the head. (x '03)

                                                                 BOTTOM. Close-up of the sensilla and their distribution
                                                                 on the labrum, mandibles, and maxillae. The lateral
                                                                 articulation of the left mandible with the ventral margin of
                                                                 the gena is visible. These spatulate jaws are drawn in
                                                                 (toward the insect) and out. ( x 85)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.5.html [1/21/2009 3:53:52 PM]
2.6




                                                                 PLATE 2.6. WORKER HEAD LATERAL VIEW

                                                                 TOP. Left profile of the head. The compound eye is in the
                                                                 tipper right corner. The relatively glabrous bladelike
                                                                 maxilla extends diagonally from lower left to center.
                                                                 Behind the makilla are the labial palps and glossa. The
                                                                 arrow indicates an area further magnified in the bottom
                                                                 micrograph. (x 55)

                                                                 BOTTOM. Higher magnification of the abductor
                                                                 apodeme and hinge of the mandibles, which is on the
                                                                 dorsal margin of the mandible (arrow in top micrograph).
                                                                 On the right side is the gena. The posterior margin of the
                                                                 gena is juxtaposed with the mandible. This apodeme is
                                                                 seen externally as a small cuticular cavity at the lateral
                                                                 margin of the mandible. The cranial abductor muscle
                                                                 inserts into the internal cuticular inflection formed by this
                                                                 apodeme. Socketed proprioceptor hairs are visible on the
                                                                 base of the mandible. (x 335)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.6.html [1/21/2009 3:53:54 PM]
 2.7




                                                                  PLATE 2.7. WORKER MOUTHPARTS

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Photomontage of the glossa. The glossa is
                                                                  extended when feeding here it is extending between the
                                                                  pendulous galeae, the terminal segment of the underlying
                                                                  labial palps are nearly covered by the galeae, and only the
                                                                  tips are exposed. The arrow indicates the area further
                                                                  magnified in the top right micrograph. ( x 34)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. External opening of the mandibular gland
                                                                  (arrow) exposed when the mandibles are wide open. (x
                                                                  100)

                                                                  MIDDLE RIGHT Higher magnification of the cutting
                                                                  edge of the right mandible. Trichoid and basiconic
                                                                  sensilla are present on the exterior surface of the
                                                                  mandibles; these putative chemoreceptors may be
                                                                  gustatory in nature and assist in tasting materials that are
                                                                  being manipulated and chewed by the mandibles. The
                                                                  longer socketed hairs may be mechanoreceptors that, on
                                                                  contact with the other mandible, provide proprioceptive
                                                                  information about the degree of mandibular retraction. (x
                                                                  110)

BOTTOM RIGHT Distal tip of the maxillary galea. A cluster of long, sharply pointed hairs extends
from the end of the galea, and nine slender, sharp setae emanate from the mediodistal margin of this part
of the maxilla. Short, peglike sensilla are sparsely posted on the lateral aspect of the galea tip. These
sense organs are probably similar to the sensilla of the mandibles, and both types are likely to have
similar roles in gustation and proprioception. (x 160)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.7.html [1/21/2009 3:53:56 PM]
2.8




                                                                 PLATE 2.8. WORKER GLOSSA

                                                                 MIDDLE. Survey of the glossa projecting outward from
                                                                 the partial clasping of the two maxillary galea. (x 53)

                                                                 TOP Bilobed glossa covered with hairs that arise from a
                                                                 series of cuticular rings. The intersegmental membrane
                                                                 intervenes between, and is overlaid by, the hairs. (x 680)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Flabellum (tongue tip). The terminus,
                                                                 attached to the glossa by a single ventral hinge, is
                                                                 spatulate and tipped with branching hairs. (x 600)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of the flabellum showing its
                                                                 spoonlike geometry and the hair fringe around the
                                                                 "spoon . " The precise function of this struc- ture is
                                                                 unknown although it may serve as a filter for the nectar,
                                                                 which apparently must flow into the "spoon" before it can
                                                                 be imbibed by the bee. (x 650)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.8.html [1/21/2009 3:53:58 PM]
 2.9




                                                                  PLATE 2.9. WORKER MOUTHPARTS, POSTERIOR
                                                                  VIEW

                                                                  LEFT Photomontage of the posterior view of the
                                                                  mouthparts. The occipital foramen (top of the field is still
                                                                  occupied by the severed tissues that pass from head to
                                                                  thorax. Flanking the foramen are two posterior tentorial
                                                                  pits. Projecting directly clown from the foramen, in the
                                                                  hollow (fossa of the proboscis) behind the head, are the
                                                                  labium and paired maxillae. The triangular piece
                                                                  immediately below the foramen is the postmentum. The
                                                                  maxillae gape, revealing the long, hairy glossa, which is
                                                                  half clasped by the labial palps. (Compare this micrograph
                                                                  with Plate 1.10, the queen mouthparts.) Lastly, the
                                                                  "shoulders" behind and on either side of the labium
                                                                  (prementum) are the mandibles. The top arrow indicates
                                                                  an area that is further magnified in the top right
                                                                  micrograph, the bottom arrow an area in the bottom right
                                                                  micrograph. The middle arrow points to the apical papilla
                                                                  of the maxillary palp, shown at higher magnification in
                                                                  the center right micrograph. (x 34)

                                                TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the prementum-
mandible sector showing the branched body hairs along
with three kinds of trichoid sensilla (lop arrow In left micrograph (x 230)

MIDDLE RIGHT . Apical papilla of the maxillary palp. One slender sensilla is seen near its tip (middle,
arrow in the left micrograph). (x 450)

BOTTOM RIGHT Array of spine-tipped cuticular scales (bottom arrow in left micrograph on the
interior surface of the maxilla (galeae). On the lateral margin of the maxilla, relatively large socketed
hairs (sensilla chaetica) arise at regular intervals. These sensors are known to be mechanoreceptors and
chemoreceptors (the latter for sugar and salts). ( x 1,200)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.9.html [1/21/2009 3:53:59 PM]
 2.10




                                                                  PLATE 2.10. WORKER MOUTHPARTS, ANTERIOR
                                                                  VIEW

                                                                  TOP Survey of worker mouthparts (the compound eye
                                                                  and vertex of the head are cropped away at the top).
                                                                  Maxillae and labium appear as a twotiered awning
                                                                  (maxillae over labium) over the glossa. Two major
                                                                  segments of the maxillae are prominent. On the right is
                                                                  the stipes with its fringe of setae. The leftmost segments,
                                                                  connecting with the stipes, are the galeae with their bare-
                                                                  ringed (basal) and then setae-fringed margins. A pair of
                                                                  labial palps flanks the decumbent, elongate glossa. When
                                                                  not in use the glossa is retracted, merged with the labium,
                                                                  enclosed by the maxillae, and then folded back at the
                                                                  hinges (arrows) Compare this micrograph with Plate 3.8,
                                                                  the retracted drone mouthparts. (x60)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Posterior (central) sector of the head.
                                                                  The principal feature is the duckbill-shaped postmentum
                                                                  of the labium. This sclerite points rearward toward the
                                                                  cervix (not visible). Above the postmentum and joining it
                                                                  is the prementum with its few short cuticular hairs. The
                                                                  cuticular "cradle" into which the postmentum fits is the
lorum. (x 175)

BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of the near-contact zone between lorum (on the left) and
postmentum (on the right). The interesting, pebblegrained inner surface of the postmentum is visible. (x
270)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.10.html [1/21/2009 3:54:01 PM]
2.11




                                                                 PLATE 2.11. WORKER MAXILLARY PALP

                                                                 BOTTOM. Survey of the anteriolateral portion of the
                                                                 head (upper arrow in top micrograph, Plate 2.10). The
                                                                 thumblike cuticular appendage in the center is the
                                                                 maxillary palp, which is to the right of the labium. Behind
                                                                 this palp (extreme lower right) is the interior surface of
                                                                 the mandible with its numerous hairs projecting inward.
                                                                 ( x 432)

                                                                 TOP Close-up of a hair plate containing about two dozen
                                                                 mechanoreceptor hairs located at the base of the maxillary
                                                                 palp. The hairs at the curved margin (upper right) are bent
                                                                 whenever the palp is moved medially so these
                                                                 mechanoreceptors can signal its movement and position
                                                                 relative to the other mouthparts. (x 2,520)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.11.html [1/21/2009 3:54:03 PM]
2.12




                                                                 PLATE 2.12. WORKER MAXILLA AND LABIUM

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Two labial palps (each partly covered by the
                                                                 galea of corresponding side maxilla) on each side of the
                                                                 very hairy glossa. (x 119)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Four-segmented labial palp. (x 119)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Frontal view of the labial palp
                                                                 showing the ultimate segment with numerous sensilla. (x
                                                                 372)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of an annulated galea with its
                                                                 robust elongate trichoid sensilla. On the right is the scaly
                                                                 surface of the labial palp. (x 480)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.12.html [1/21/2009 3:54:04 PM]
2.13




                                                                 PLATE 2.13. WORKER ORAL CAVITY

                                                                 BOTTOM Base of the extended proboscis, posterior view.
                                                                 Angling off and extending to the lower left corner is the
                                                                 stipes. At center is the interior surface of the left
                                                                 mandible. To the right of center is the right mandible,
                                                                 which is further magnified in the center right micrograph.
                                                                 (x 75)

                                                                 MIDDLE RIGHT Interior surface of the partially closed
                                                                 mandibles. The arrows indicate areas further magnified in
                                                                 the top and bottom left micrographs. (x 3,200)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Cuticular scales in the oral cavity
                                                                 (lower arrow in center right micrograph). (x3,200)

                                                                 TOP Close-up of the interior surface of the oral cavity
                                                                 (upper arrow in center right micrograph). ( x 3,200)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.13.html [1/21/2009 3:54:06 PM]
2.14




                                                                 PLATE 2.14. WORKER POSTGENAL AREA

                                                                 BOTTOM Ventral view of the occipital region of the head
                                                                 capsule. A portion of the cervix (neck) (center top) is
                                                                 flanked by the posterior tentorial pits. The "Gothic arch"
                                                                 is formed by the two postgenal inflections that surround
                                                                 the fossa of the proboscis. A membranous region with
                                                                 parallel folds Joins the postmentum (the "duckbill" at the
                                                                 bottom of the field). (x 108)

                                                                 TOP Cuticular spines on the intersegmental membrane in
                                                                 the area immediately below the tip of the postmentum. (x
                                                                 4,320)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.14.html [1/21/2009 3:54:08 PM]
 2.15




                                                                  PLATE 2.15. WORKER CERVIX, VENTRAL VIEW

                                                                  TOP Posterioventral view of head where the membranous
                                                                  cervix (neck) (covered with ranks of short spines) Joins
                                                                  the head. On either side of the cervix are the posterior
                                                                  tentorial pits. The occipital foramen (where the cervix
                                                                  joins the head) is flanked by two hair plates, each
                                                                  consisting of 30 short, trichoid sensilla (arrow) which are
                                                                  bent when the head turns laterally toward the cervix.
                                                                  These sensilla are gravity receptors. The pre- mentum
                                                                  extends upward, pointing to the cervix. (x 80)

                                                                  TOP LEFT Close-up of the 30 socketed hairs (known
                                                                  mechanoreceptors that make up the left lateral occipital
                                                                  hair plate. These are adjacent to the cervix (arrow in top
                                                                  right micrograph). (x 720)

                                            BOTTOM Posterior of the head. The hair plate is located
                                            in the ventromedial region of the head (arrow in top right
                                            micrograph). These trichoid sensilla are probably gravity
                                            receptors (and external proprioceptors) that inform the
                                            central nervous system about the attitude of the head and/
                                            or mouthparts relative to the rest of the body. Signaling
may be accomplished when the hairs contact and are bent by the postmenturn or the cervical sclerite. (x
720)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.15.html [1/21/2009 3:54:09 PM]
 2.16




                                                                  PLATE 2.16. WORKER CERVIX AND VENTRAL
                                                                  POSTOCCIPUT

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Posterior view of the head showing the
                                                                  cervix (neck). Oil the left is the left tentorial pit. In the
                                                                  right half of the field the cervical membrane connects the
                                                                  occipital foramen of the head to the prescutum of the
                                                                  thorax. The upper arrow points to the area further
                                                                  magnified in the bottom right micrograph; the lower
                                                                  arrow points to the area shown in the top micrograph. (x
                                                                  68)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT Close-up of the left tentorial pit. The
                                                                  large "hole" is the external manifestation of an inwardly
                                                                  directed posterior tentorial arm, an important constituent
                                                                  of the endoskeleton, or tentorium. The small cavity above
                                                                  leads to the cannular tentorial bridge; the smaller one
                                                                  below is a tube that extends ventrally inward and
                                                                  terminates at the occipital foramen. (x 220)

                                            BOTTOM RIGHT Array of body hairs on the ventral
                                            portion of the cervix. These may engage the cervical hair
                                            plate on the posterior portion of the head (upper arrow in
middle left micrograph) to monitor head movement (X 980)

TOP The ventral cervical hair plate on the prescutum (lower arrow in middle left micrograph). These
three dozen or so socketed hairs constitute a major external proprioceptor organ that monitors head
flexion. Specifically, these mechanoreceptors record the degree of ventral (downward) projection of the
head as the lower part of the head touches these hairs on the "throat." (x875)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.16.html [1/21/2009 3:54:11 PM]
2.17




                                                                 PLATE 2.17. WORKER CERVIX, VENTRAL VIEW,
                                                                 CLOSE-UP

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Ventral cervix with an unidentified mass
                                                                 that may be a congealed secretion. (See also Plate 2.15,
                                                                 top right micrograph.) ( x 910)

                                                                 BOTTOM Ventral view of the cervix with the congealed
                                                                 mass removed The area beneath the mass is quite unlike
                                                                 the surface of the rest of the cervical membrane.
                                                                 Numerous unoriented, unsocketed, short hairs arise from
                                                                 nonsclerotized cuticle. (x3,060)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Ventral view showing several ranks of these
                                                                 triangular cuticular scales, from each of which issue about
                                                                 a dozen hairs of varying lengths. (x 1,320)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT Close-up of several triangular scales
                                                                 showing that the longest hairs emanate fron-i the
                                                                 triangular apex. A slight film (probably honey) is visible
                                                                 at the base of some of the scales. ( x 2,750)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.17.html [1/21/2009 3:54:13 PM]
2.18




                                                                 PLATE 2.18 WORKER CERVIX, DORSAL VIEW

                                                                 BOTTOM Dorsal cervix (neck). The flexible,
                                                                 nonsclerotized membranous nature of the cervix (neck) is
                                                                 evident. (The neck has been stretched on this specimen.)
                                                                 A pair of lateral hair plates (one per side) is visible.
                                                                 Certain mechanoreceptor hairs in each plate are
                                                                 stimulated when the\- engage the back of the head (arrow)
                                                                 ( x 94)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Lateral hair plate (the head is to the top, the
                                                                 thorax at the bottom). (x 225)

                                                                 TOP LEFT Head, posterior view. The vaulted area in the
                                                                 upper region of this field is the back of the head, the basal
                                                                 portion the thorax. Sensory hairs situated on the curved
                                                                 plate engage the back of the head, (x240)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT. Surface relief of the cervical membrane,
                                                                 dorsal view. The rows of small rounded tubercles have
                                                                 small, discrete projections arising from them. (x 1,000)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.18.html [1/21/2009 3:54:15 PM]
 2.20




                                                                  PLATE 2.20. WORKER WINGS

                                                                  RIGHT. Photomontage of worker wings, a survey of most
                                                                  of the metathoracic (hind) wing covering a sizable
                                                                  fraction of the mesothoracic (fore-) wing. Most of the
                                                                  wing sclerites (plates at the wing base) are shrouded with
                                                                  hairs. ( x 2 7)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Wing bases with wings folded back over the
                                                                  abdomen. The hairy, roughly rectangular pleurite (at 10
                                                                  o'clock) is the supraepimeron; immediately below it is the
                                                                  intraepimeron. (x 55)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Pit marking the apodeme on the pleural
                                                                  sulcus between the intraepimeron and episternum. (x 240)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Dorsolateral view of wing sclerites with
                                                                  wings extended (the head is to the left). The posterior
                                                                  notal wing process is prominent (at 8 o clock) with the
                                                                  radius (wing vein) approaching the side of the process.
                                                                  With their wings "disengaged" and folded back over the
                                                                  body, bees are able to vibrate their wing muscles to
                                                                  produce heat and also sounds, such as those created while
dancing. ( x 50)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.20.html [1/21/2009 3:54:17 PM]
2.21




                                                                 PLATE 2.21. WORKER WING SURFACE, DORSAL
                                                                 VIEW

                                                                 TOP Leading edge and upper surface of the forewing. The
                                                                 costal ribs are covered with short and rnedium-length
                                                                 hairs. Hairs arising from ribs may be innervated because
                                                                 the hollow rib can acconuriodatc nerves and heiriolymph.
                                                                 (x 170)

                                                                 BOTTOM Leading edge and upper surface of the hind
                                                                 wing showing the bank of hooks that connects with the
                                                                 curled posterior margin of the forewing. The hind-wing
                                                                 hooks of the worker are somewhat smaller and more
                                                                 angulated than those of the drone. Rows of microtrichia
                                                                 stud the surface of the hind wing. (x 318)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.21.html [1/21/2009 3:54:19 PM]
2.22



                                                                 PLATE 2.22. WORKER WING SURFACE, VENTRAL
                                                                 VIEW

                                                                 TOP LEFT Ventral wing surface in the midwing area
                                                                 showing the complete rank of 21 hooks engaging the
                                                                 posterior marginal fold of the forewing. Setal distribution
                                                                 patterns are evident, and a few setae arise from the wing
                                                                 veins. (x 70)

                                                                 BOTTOM Ventral surface of the forewings (upper and
                                                                 hind wings (lower) hooked as in flight. The forewing
                                                                 posterior margin fold or curl is especially distinct (x 170)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Setae from the ventral surface of the
                                                                 forewing. In this and the middle right micrograph, the
                                                                 wing surface is slightly wrinkled, which may be due in
                                                                 part to drying after death. ( x 330)

                                                                 MIDDLE RIGHT Higher magnification of the intervein
                                                                 setae from the ventral surface of the hind wing. ( x 330)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.22.html [1/21/2009 3:54:20 PM]
 2.23




                                                                  PLATE 2.23. WORKER WING HOOKS

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Survey of a posterior section of the forewing
                                                                  (foreground) in proximity to the corresponding anterior
                                                                  margin (radius and media veins) of the hind wing with the
                                                                  hooks (hamuli) that connect both wings in flight.
                                                                  Microtrichia and small peg organs cover the anterior
                                                                  margins of the worker hind wing (while only microtrichia
                                                                  are noted in queens; see Plate 1.23) and on the opposing
                                                                  portion of the forewing. (x 77)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Higher magnification of the hind wing
                                                                  hooks with nearby short peg organs. Hooks arise from a
                                                                  socket; each hook is bent twice, at the midpoint and at the
                                                                  tip. (x 600)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Close-up of three peg organs. Each socket
                                                                  has a limited amount of free space that might permit some
                                                                  movement of the peg. (x 5,400)

                                               BOTTOM. Hind-wing hook articulating with the
                                               thickened posterior margin of the forewing. Thus
                                               connected, the two wings function essentially as one,
which provides a larger gliding surface. The forewing is driven while the hind wing passively trails in
flight. The wing beat frequency is approximately 235 to 250 per second. (x 2,660)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.23.html [1/21/2009 3:54:22 PM]
 2.24




                                                                  PLATE 2.24. WORKER FORELEG

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Photomontage of the entire leg. The
                                                                  deeply notched antenna cleaner is at the proximal end of
                                                                  the basitarsus. A stress receptor (the subgenual organ) on
                                                                  the interior of the tibia detects substrate vibration (sound).
                                                                  The arrow indicates an area further magnified in the top
                                                                  right micrograph. ( x 3 1)

                                                                  TOP LEFT Articulation between tibia and femur The
                                                                  wrinkled, flexible intersegmental membrane has small
                                                                  cuticular spines. (x 200)

                                                                  BOTTOM Higher magnification of the tibia-basitarsus
                                                                  antenna cleaner (comb). The deep notch is on the
                                                                  proximal end of the basitarsus, over which lies the fibula,
                                                                  a thumblike spur that extends from the distal portion of
                                                                  the tibia. The antenna is placed in the notch and drawn
                                                                  past the fine comb and fibula. All castes have an antenna
                                                                  cleaner. (x 144)

                                                 TOP RIGHT Five tarsal segments (arrow in center left
                                                 micrograph). Each of the four most proximal tarsomeres
is connected via monocondylic articulations. Their concerted movement is effected by the shortening of
a tendon that traverses the entire length of these segments. (x 105)

MIDDLE RIGHT Claws and the fleshy lobe (arolium) lying between the claws. Each claw has two
principal points, one short and rather rounded, the other elongate and sharper. Several long and slender
hairs are on each claw. (x 180)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.24.html [1/21/2009 3:54:24 PM]
 2.25




                                                                  PLATE 2.25. WORKER ANTENNA CLEANER

                                                                  TOP LEFT Tibia-basitarsus joint. The tangential view of
                                                                  the bulbous fibula (bilobed spur) from the tibia positioned
                                                                  over the antenna cleaner notch on the basitarsus is
                                                                  particularly useful because it gives another dimension to
                                                                  the vital grooming apparatus (previously, the fibula was
                                                                  described as a large, flattened spur). (x 140)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT Tibia -basitarsus joint in profile. The extent
                                                                  of overlap be- tween the fibula and the semicircular notch
                                                                  on the basitarsus shows that the antenna would be almost
                                                                  completely surrounded by the antenna cleaner when the
                                                                  basitarsus is fully flexed. (x 86)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. "Fan" of the seventy spinelike hairs of
                                                                  the tarsal comb. These hairs are responsible for cleaning
                                                                  the outer surface of the antenna. (x 260)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Tarsal hairs. The pectinate quality of
                                                                  the tarsal hairs is evident here. Ridges or corrugations on
                                                                  the medial expanse of each hair, at right angles to the long
                                                                  axis of the hair, give additional cleaning capacity and
traction to the antenna cleaner. (x 1,560)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.25.html [1/21/2009 3:54:26 PM]
2.26




                                                                 PLATE 2.26. WORKER FOOT

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Last tarsomere and pretarsus. Claws are
                                                                 on either side of the wrinkled arolium. Above the arolium
                                                                 is the heavily bristled planta; above the planta is the
                                                                 unguitractor, which is without seta but has rows of low-
                                                                 lying cuticular scales. This structure may function like the
                                                                 heel of a hand, providing an Opposing surface for the
                                                                 claw. (x 1,50)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Frontal view of the medial surface of
                                                                 the foot. The bilobed character of the unguitractor is better
                                                                 seen in this view, as well as the deep pit or fossa (arrow)
                                                                 at the base of the subordinate claw. (x 210)

                                                                 TOP Higher magnification of the planta and unguitractor.
                                                                 (x 540)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.26.html [1/21/2009 3:54:27 PM]
2.27




                                                                 PLATE 2.27. WORKER MIDDLE LEG

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Lateral view of the mesothoracic (middle)
                                                                 lea. The femur is to the right of the tibia, which bears [lie
                                                                 basitarsus. A prominent tibial spine is present at the tibia-
                                                                 basitarsus Joint. (x 40)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Close-up of the tibia-basitarsus joint of
                                                                 the middle leg, the tibial spine, and the so-called (but
                                                                 inappropriately named) wax spur (see Plate 2.38). The
                                                                 setal character changes abruptly from tibia to basi-- tarsus.
                                                                 ( x 78)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Femur-tibia articulation, lateral view. (x
                                                                 93)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Medial view of the femur-tibia joint showing
                                                                 the flexible, nonsclerotized, intersegmental membrane
                                                                 connecting the two limbs. Many small setae stud this
                                                                 membrane. (x 182)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.27.html [1/21/2009 3:54:29 PM]
 2.28




                                                                  PLATE 2.28. WORKER HIND LEG

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Photomontage of the hind
                                                                  (metathoracic) leg, lateral view. The ascending femur (on
                                                                  the right) articulates with the descending tibia, the base of
                                                                  which is the basitarsus. The pollen basket is comprised of
                                                                  the curved hairs surrounding the glabrous central area of
                                                                  the tibia. (x 31)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT Medial surface of the leg showing the femur
                                                                  (right) and tibia ( x 3 1)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Higher magnification of the femur-tibia joint
                                                                  (the "knee") and its connective or intersegmental
                                                                  membrane (see the top right micrograph). (x 150)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT Articulation between the tibia and
                                                                  basitarsus showing the pollen press. The rakelike group of
                                                                  hairs (rastellum) projects downward from the lobe called
                                                                  the auricle. The arrow indicates an area further magnified
                                                                  in the bottom left micrograph. ( x 95)

                                                BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of the hairs
located at the proximal apex of the basitarsus (arrow in middle left micrograph). These may be
mechanoreceptors (external proprioceptors); if so, when the rastellum contacts the basitarsus the nerves
in these hairs would inform the central nervous system of the attitude of the basitarsus relative to that of
the tibia and whether any pollen was being pressed (collapsed pollen grains are visible at the base of the
hairs). ( x 530)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.28.html [1/21/2009 3:54:31 PM]
2.29




                                                                 PLATE 2.29. WORKER POLLEN BASKET

                                                                 RIGHT Photomontage (a continuation from Plate 2.27)
                                                                 showing, from top to bottom, the lateral surface of the
                                                                 tibia, the basitarsus, and the remaining tarsomeres. The
                                                                 hair arrangement on the tibia is the basis of the pollen
                                                                 basket. The auricle (ridge) and its hair fringe at the
                                                                 Junction of the tibia and basitarsus are highlighted. (x 42)

                                                                 TOP LEFT Higher magnification of the auricle with its
                                                                 fringe of hairs. Looming above these hairs is the rank of
                                                                 spines of the rastellum ("little rake"). (x 62)

                                                                 MIDDLE LEFT Close-up of a portion (Six spines) of the
                                                                 rastellum situated at the joint between tibia and basitarsus
                                                                 (proximal view). (x 186)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Distal tibia. Fine setae extend along the
                                                                 auricular ridge immediately above the rastellum.
                                                                 Polygonal scales are evident on this ridge. (x 670)




file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.29.html [1/21/2009 3:54:33 PM]
 2.30




                                                                  PLATE 2.30. WORKER POLLEN PRESS

                                                                  RIGHT Photomontage of the metathoracic (hind) leg and
                                                                  its medial surface. From top to bottom are the tibia,
                                                                  basitarsus, and four short tarsal segments. Between the
                                                                  tibia and basitarsus is the flattened, notched pollen press.
                                                                  The ranks of hairs act as combs for grooming and pollen
                                                                  gathering. When the basitarsal combs are loaded to
                                                                  capacity with pollen, the rastellum (rake) is used to unload
                                                                  the comb by scraping it into the press where the pollen is
                                                                  compressed and transferred to the tibial baskets on the
                                                                  outside surface above the pollen press. Hence, pollen
                                                                  groomed from the right side of the body is combed from
                                                                  the inner surfaces of the middle and forelegs by the left
                                                                  hind leg, from which it is removed by the right rastelhun
                                                                  for deposition in the pollen basket of the same leg. The
                                                                  opposite sequence is used for the left side. ( x 47)

                                              MIDDLE LEFT Mediolateral view, of the pollen press.
                                              The floor of the press is edged with fine hairs, and its
                                              surface is covered with denticlelike cuticular spines or
                                              scales. Long, curved hairs from the tibia bend down and
                                              lie over the press and a picket of shorter, stiff spines
(rastellum) lines the dorsomedial margin of the press.
Small mechanoreceptor hairs are visible at the leading edge of the spatulate hairs (upper left). (x 100)

TOP LEFT Hairs on the medial surface of the tibia. The flattened-tip spatulate character of these hairs
contrasts markedly with the basitarsal hairs, which have serrated edges and a fairly sharp tip. The
specialized hairs of the tibia may have an important function in the process of gathering and packing
pollen (see Plate 2.31). (x 560)

BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of the sharp cuticular spines (spicules) that line the floor of the
pollen press and the finer hairs that form a fringe around the press. (x 400)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.30.html [1/21/2009 3:54:35 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.31.html

2.31

                                                                 PLATE 2.31. WORKER HIND TIBIA, MEDIAL
                                                                 SURFACE

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Low-magnification view of the spatulate hairs
                                                                 on the inside of the tibia. (x 560)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT. Higher magnification of tibial hairs. The
                                                                 fluted and curvaceous character of the tibial hairs is
                                                                 evident. (x 1,705)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of tibial hairs
                                                                 showing their broad, flattened tips. (x 1,800)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Overview of tibial hairs on the hind
                                                                 leg. These particular hairs possess a geometry that seems
                                                                 ideal for holding or cradling small objects such as the
                                                                 pollen grain visible here. The fluted sides of the hair add
                                                                 surface area to enable a better grip on a pollen grain. The
                                                                 broad tip may be useful in combing pollen from wing
                                                                 surfaces. (x 750)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.31.html [1/21/2009 3:54:35 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.32.html

2.32

                                                                 PLATE 2.32 WORKER ABDOMEN

                                                                 Lateral view of the worker gaster (abdomen). See the
                                                                 discussion accompaning Plate 1.36




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.32.html [1/21/2009 3:54:35 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.33.html

2.33

                                                                 PLATE 2.33. WORKER ABDOMINAL SPIRACLE

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Spiracular aperture (arrow), visible directly
                                                                 below the origin of the hind wing posterior margin. The
                                                                 rather triangular lateral pleurite to the left of the spiracle is
                                                                 the supraepisternum of the metathorax. ( x 43)

                                                                 TOP LEFT Close-up of the spiracular aperture and the
                                                                 inner longitudinal ridge that is part of the closing valve. A
                                                                 cuticular rim circles this, the largest of all worker spiracles.
                                                                 ( x 350)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Second abdominal spiracle (arrow) The
                                                                 mesothoracic and then metathoracic coxae are visible
                                                                 (bottom left). (x 43)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Second abdominal spiracle showing its
                                                                 overall external shape and cuticular rim. (x 350)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.33.html [1/21/2009 3:54:36 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.34.html

2.34

                                                                 PLATE 2.34. WORKER PETIOLE, DORSAL VIEW

                                                                 TOP Survey of the dorsal view of the petiole. At the very
                                                                 top is the broad posterior expanse of the propodeum. Most
                                                                 of the figure is filled with the anterior face of the second
                                                                 abdominal tergum. The petiole pocket is visible here as a
                                                                 small, cuticular, semicircular well that connects to a
                                                                 membranous petiole. (x 153)

                                                                 MIDDLE Higher magnification of the elevated cupolalike
                                                                 area over the petiole pocket. The sparse and regular
                                                                 orientation of the cuticular tubercles in this membranous
                                                                 area is also visible. (x 680)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Another view of the dorsal petiole
                                                                 showing the posteriorly directed membrane that extends
                                                                 over the propodeal cavity (x 250)

                                                BOTTOM LEFT Lateral hair plate of the petiole.
                                                Stimulation of these mechanoreceptor hairs determines the
                                                degree of gravitational torsion of the gaster (abdomen)
                                                onto the petiole-thorax area. About three dozen large hairs
and about twenty very short hairs make up this hair plate.
It is not known if all of these socketed hairs are innervated. (x 435)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.34.html [1/21/2009 3:54:36 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.35.html

2.35

                                                                 PLATE 2.35 WORKER PETIOLE, VENTRAL VIEW

                                                                 TOP Two hair plates, one on each side of the petiolar joint.
                                                                 (x 153)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Petiolar hair plate. When the second
                                                                 abdominal sternum in moves, certain mechanosensory
                                                                 hairs on this plate are contacted (and thus stimulated).
                                                                 These external proprioceptors monitor the movement and
                                                                 position of the major part of the abdomen relative to the
                                                                 orientation of the thorax. (x 208)

                                                                 BOTTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of the right
                                                                 petiolar hair plates. About fifty movable (in a preferred
                                                                 direction) mechanosensory hairs report the gravitational
                                                                 pull of the abdomen on the thorax. (x 420)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.35.html [1/21/2009 3:54:36 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.36.html

2.36

                                                                 PLATE 2.36. WORKER A13DOMINAL WALL

                                                                 TOP Photomontage of the fourth tergite (left) followed by
                                                                 the three terminal tergites (fifth, sixth, and seventh). These
                                                                 overlie and completely conceal the corresponding pleural
                                                                 elements so that the related sternites (bottom) apparently
                                                                 make contact with the tergites. Beneath the anterior
                                                                 position of sternites four to seven are the wax glands. The
                                                                 spiracles on the last two tergites are barely visible (arrows)
                                                                 ( x 3 1)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Branched hairs from the third abdominal
                                                                 sternite. Some of these hairs are attached to gland cells
                                                                 whose function in workers is unknown (see the discussion
                                                                 of Plate 1.41, bottom left micrograph). (x 170)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of the cuticular 11 scale" and
                                                                 setae (several forms) from the abdominal sclerites. (x 1,
                                                                 116)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.36.html [1/21/2009 3:54:36 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.37.html

2.37

                                                                 PLATE 2.37. WORKER ABDOMINAL SPIRACLES

                                                                 TOP LEFT Photomontage of the abdomen showing the
                                                                 second and third abdominal spiracles (arrows). (x 31)

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the third abdominal
                                                                 spiracle. Cuticular hairs (two are visible) are not always
                                                                 present. No cuticular rim is evident. ( x 384)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of the slitlike
                                                                 second abdominal spiracle. Note the longitudinally
                                                                 disposed valve extending parallel with the elongate sides
                                                                 of the spiracle. A patch of very short setae is visible on the
                                                                 right rim of the spiracle ( x 1, 118)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of the sculptured (shingled)
                                                                 appearance of the cuticle near the abdominal spiracles. (x
                                                                 1,023)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.37.html [1/21/2009 3:54:37 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.38.html

2.38

                                                                 PLATE 2.38. WORKER ABDOMEN, VENTRAL VIEW

                                                                 TOP Abdominal sternites, ventral view. The glabrous
                                                                 surfaces are the wax " mirrors," or plates. Beneath these
                                                                 plates are the wax glands. Wax per- meates the mirrors and
                                                                 hardens into the visible wax scales from which the honey
                                                                 bees construct comb. The rastellum (see Plate 2.29), not
                                                                 the wax spur, on the hind leg is used to remove these
                                                                 scales when fully formed (rastellar marks are visible on the
                                                                 medial edges of the scales). (x 60)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of the lower left
                                                                 quadrant of the top micrograph showing the medial margin
                                                                 of the wax mirror and the adjacent wax scale. (x 136)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Fully formed wax scale. (x 60)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.38.html [1/21/2009 3:54:37 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.39.html

2.39

                                                                 PLATE 2.39. WORKER NASSANov GLAND

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Hairy sixth and the partly hairless
                                                                 seventh abdominal tergites. The glandular area behind the
                                                                 ridge is not exposed. This view complements the one in the
                                                                 top left micrograph, showing the entire expanse of this
                                                                 tergite. (x 56)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Lateral view of the last (seventh) abdominal
                                                                 tergum (dorsal is left). The smooth hairless area is
                                                                 dernarked by the strong submarginal inner ridge; above
                                                                 that is a margin of elevation on the tergum. At the base of
                                                                 this tergum, between terga. six and seven is the scent gland
                                                                 of Nassanov. (x 65)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT. Pores in the seventh tergite, from
                                                                 which issues the orientation (aggregation) pheromone
                                                                 produced by the Nassanov gland. (x 1,240)

                                                                 MIDDLE RIGHT. Higher magnification of the pores in the
                                                                 bottom right micrograph. (x 10,000)

TOP RIGHT. Close-up of the base of the seventh tergum, which is overlapped by the sixth tergite. (x
484)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.39.html [1/21/2009 3:54:37 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.40.html

2.40s

                                                                 PLATE 2.40. WORKER STING

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Exposed sting apparatus, ventral view.
                                                                 The base of the lancets extends upward into the right and
                                                                 left cuticular arcs (each made up of the first and second
                                                                 rami). At their base and extending laterally and down is the
                                                                 oblong plate. On the lateral margin of the plate is the
                                                                 quadrate plate, a shieldlike vestige of the ninth tergite. The
                                                                 two lobes of the sting sheath angle toward the distal
                                                                 lancets. (x 45)

                                                                 MIDDLE. Distal tip of the sting. The serrated lancet is
                                                                 next to the protruding stylet. Not readily visible but present
                                                                 are campaniform sensilla assoclated with each barb (see
                                                                 also Plate 1.43, queen sting). (x 540)

                                                                 TOP Photomontage of the sting, dorsal view. Visible are
                                                                 the first and second rami on the medial and lateral sides
                                                                 respectively of the doublearched extension of the
                                                                 triangular plate. This proximal part of the sting connects
                                                                 the lancets and stylet to the sting protractor muscles. A
                                                                 hairy lobe embraces the base of the lancets; this structure
                                                                 is believed to be the ventral wall of abdominal segment
nine. (x 55)

BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of a barb on a lancet, about midway down the shaft of the lancet.
(x 3,600)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.40.html [1/21/2009 3:54:37 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.41.html

2.41

                                                                 PLATE 2.41. WORKER STING, RETRACTED

                                                                 TOP RIGHT Sting apparatus, ventral view. Paired oblong
                                                                 plates straddle the lancets (exposed by dissection). On the
                                                                 dorsomedial surface of each oblong plate is a cleft (arrow).
                                                                 (x 91)

                                                                 TOP LEFT. Higher magnification of the cleft in the top
                                                                 right micrograph. The background hairs are from a
                                                                 membrane thought to be the unsclerotized remains of the
                                                                 ventral wall of segment nine. ( x 868)

                                                                 BOTTOM RIGHT Higher magnification of the base of the
                                                                 lancets in the top right micrograph. Two flangelike medial
                                                                 parts of the oblong plates cover part of the lancet base.
                                                                 Hairs of the lobe of the ninth segment are visible (lower
                                                                 right). (x 650)

                                                                 BOTTOM LEFT. Two lancets with barbed edges
                                                                 overlying the more extended stylet. ( x 360)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/worker/2.41.html [1/21/2009 3:54:38 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.1.html

3.1

                                                                  PLATE 3.1 DRONE HEAD

                                                                  Frontal vie of the drone head.




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.1.html [1/21/2009 3:54:39 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.2.html

3.2

                                                                      PLATE 3.2. DRONE COMPOUND AND SIMPLE EYE

                                                                      TOP RIGHT. Compound eye covered with interfacetal
                                                                      hairs. These innervated setae arise in the interstitial space
                                                                      between adjacent facets of the compound eye. At the base
                                                                      of each hair is a single bipolar neuron. These hairs are
                                                                      mechanoreceptors; by bending they monitor direction of
                                                                      wind currents and airspeed. (x 140)

                                                                      TOP LEFT. Higher magnification of the corneal surface
                                                                      of the compound eye showing the socketed base of each
                                                                      hair and the hexagonal outline of each lens facet. Lens
                                                                      facets at the periphery of the eye often have other frontal
                                                                      view geometric shapes. (x 1,400)

                                                                      BOTTOM LEFT. Longitudinal section through the
                                                                      corneal lens of the compound eye. The deep cleft through
                                                                      the lens marks the boundary of one ommatidium; this
                                                                      recess also provides the space necessary to house the
                                                                      neuron and glia of the hair. The biconvex design of each
                                                                      lens facet and the cuticular laminations are also evident.
                                                                      (x 1,650)

BOTTOM RIGHT. One medial and two lateral ocelli. These three "simple" photoreceptor organs are
located on the vertex of the head between the two compound eyes. Ocelli usually do not form images.
These photoreceptors may monitor light levels and possibly provide input to some photoperiodically
entrained circadian rhythms. No function is known for the profuse bundles of fine hairs between the
ocelli. (x 60)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.2.html [1/21/2009 3:54:41 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.3.html

3.3

                                                                  PLATE 3.3. DRONE ANTENNA AND BASE

                                                                  TOP. Drone antenna. There are twelve sections of the
                                                                  antenna. The drone antenna has far fewer trichoid sensilla
                                                                  (the very short white 11 whiskers" on the flagellum) than
                                                                  do queen and worker antennae (see Plates 1.6 and 2.4). (x
                                                                  53)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Higher magnification of the antennal
                                                                  base showing the basal knob of the scape inserting into the
                                                                  membrane-lined antennal socket. Microtrichia are
                                                                  abundant over this "membrane." Ranks of socketed
                                                                  (putative) mechanoreceptor hairs completely encircle the
                                                                  base. (x 347)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT Articulation between two antennal
                                                                  (flagellar) sections. Each subdivision (they are not true
                                                                  segments) fits into the succeeding one without any real
                                                                  articulation or musculature. The base of each annular
                                                                  portion inserts into a small cavity of the one behind it.
                                                                  Spines are absent on the intersegmental membranes. (x
                                                                  304)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.3.html [1/21/2009 3:54:43 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.4.html

3.4

                                                                  PLATE 3.4 DRONE ANTENNA

                                                                  TOP Elbow dividing the antenna into a basal stalk (scape)
                                                                  (extending diagonally to the left) and a more flexible distal
                                                                  portion (projecting downward). The pedicel is the second
                                                                  segment of the antenna and located at the elbow (after the
                                                                  scape); the flagellar "segments" follow. The flagellum can
                                                                  be moved relative to the scape by two muscles that
                                                                  originate in the scape and insert in the pedicel. Flagellar
                                                                  "segments" do not articulate with each other, nor are
                                                                  muscles present between flagellar sections. (x 88)

                                                                  BOTTOM Close-up of the elbow. The intersegmental
                                                                  membrane between scape and pedicel is studded with
                                                                  short, slender hairs. Some of the stouter, longer setae of the
                                                                  pedicel are bent as the pedicel-flagellum twists. These
                                                                  hairs may be proprioceptors that, when bent, report the
                                                                  attitude of the flagellum in space to the central nervous
                                                                  system. (x 720)

                                             TOP RIGHT Higher magnification of the lateral surface of
                                             the first flagellar segment of the antenna in the top left
                                             micrograph, immediately below the pedicel-flagellum
boundary. A dozen stout, socketed hairs (sensilla chaetica) are interspersed among plate organs (sensilla
placodea). The center dome of these plate organs is exquisitely thin cuticle that is easily broken in
specimen preparation. A few intact plate organs are visible on the periphery of the field. (x 660)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.4.html [1/21/2009 3:54:45 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.5.html

3.5

                                                                  PLATE 3.5. DRONE ANTENNA Tip

                                                                  TOP RIGHT Terminal three segments of the antenna. At
                                                                  this magnification all that is visible are peg organs and the
                                                                  faint, pebble-grained effect created by the profusion of
                                                                  plate organs. Both peg and plate organs are olfactory
                                                                  organs. The pits on the last two segments are really
                                                                  aggregations of a half dozen or so pit organs (sensilla
                                                                  coeloconica, sensilla ampullacia). (x 140)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Higher magnification of three antennal
                                                                  segments. The three sense organs (peg, pit, and plate
                                                                  sensilla) are more evident at this magnification. ( x 420)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Ten pit organs set in a cuticular
                                                                  depression and surrounded by plate organs. One socketed
                                                                  peg is visible at the top. The presence of free space at the
                                                                  peg base may permit the hair shaft to move; if so, this hair
                                                                  may be a mechanoreceptor. (x 4,200)

                                                BOTTOM RIGHT. Cuticular depression on the antenna]
                                                segment. In this view pit organs predominate but two
"pits" (at 11 o'clock) are capped; these organs may be
campaniform sensilla, and if so, they must be mechanoreceptors monitoring strains of the cuticle. It is
not known why this whole cuticular depression appears so bright. Even if a residual static charge at this
locus attracted more gold in the shadowing process, it remains a mystery why such a charge would be
preferentially located here and persist after death. ( x 1,705)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.5.html [1/21/2009 3:54:46 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.6.html

3.6

                                                                  PLATE 3.6. DRONE ANTENNA TIP, VENTRAL
                                                                  SURFACE

                                                                  TOP Low magnification of the antenna tip. At least four
                                                                  morphological variations of the peg organs can be
                                                                  resolved, and most of these are close to the antenna
                                                                  terminus. The plate organs are located more posteriorly
                                                                  and are circumferentially arranged around this segment (x
                                                                  306)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of the antenna
                                                                  showing thick pegs, plate organs, and pit organs. Each pit
                                                                  organ bears a curious bright margin around its orifice.
                                                                  Odor molecules enter the pit as easily as they penetrate the
                                                                  tiny pores that radiate out in spokelike fashion on the plate
                                                                  organs. (x 1,100)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Thick-set peg organs and more slender,
                                                                  curved hairs, all set in sockets. The curling tips of some of
                                                                  these hairs may be the result of electron beam damage. (x
                                                                  3,300)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.6.html [1/21/2009 3:54:48 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.7.html

3.7

                                                                  PLATE 3.7. DRONE ANTENNA SURFACE

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Survey of the terminal seven segments
                                                                  of the antenna. (x 255)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of the tip of the
                                                                  antenna showing the packed, oval plate receptors (sensilla
                                                                  placodea) and the whiskery appearance of short peg
                                                                  (basiconic) sensilla and slender hairs (sensilla chaetica).
                                                                  There are nine distinct types of sense organs located on the
                                                                  worker antenna (only three types are seen in this field).
                                                                  Compare with Plate 2.4, worker antenna. (x 60)

                                                                  TOP Higher magnification of the plate, peg, and chaetica-
                                                                  type receptors on the penultimate segment of the antenna.
                                                                  (x 1,800)

                                                                  MIDDLE RIGHT Plate and peg organs on the next to last
                                                                  segment of the antenna. Both types are olfactory organs.
                                                                  ( x 3,750)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.7.html [1/21/2009 3:54:49 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.8.html

3.8

                                                                  PLATE 3.8. DRONE MOUTHPARTS

                                                                  TOP LEFT Photomontage of the retracted mouthparts,
                                                                  ventral view. In the Lipper center of the field are the
                                                                  incisorlike (triangular), paired galeae, and to the immediate
                                                                  right is one of the two labial palps. Crossed mandibles
                                                                  arise above and are at right angles to the galeae, with the
                                                                  paired antennae visible above the mandibles at this
                                                                  viewing angle. The upright tufts of setae on either side of
                                                                  the mandibles are the interfacetal hairs of the compound
                                                                  eyes. The cervix and paired episternal sclerites are visible
                                                                  below the galeae. Compare with Plates 2.7 and 2. 10, the
                                                                  worker mouthparts. (x 31)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT Retracted mouthparts, frontal view. At this
                                                                  viewing angle the curved and pointed galeae partly shroud
                                                                  the labial paips and almost com- pletely cover the short
                                                                  glossa (tongue), whose terminus is visible at the Point
                                                                  where the galeae first cross. At the top of this figure are the
                                                                  hirsute, crossed mandibles. (x 65)

                                               BOTTOM LEFT Higher magnification of the frontal view.
                                               At the very top of the field is the platelike clypeus, and
successively below that are the labrum, mandibles, and galeae, which largely cover the labium with the
exception of the final segments of labial palps. (x 63)

MIDDLE RIGHT Interior surface of the mandibles. Two tiers of stout, socketed hairs are on this medial
surface. (x 135)

BOTTOM RIGHT Higher magnification of several hairs on the medial side of the mandible in the
middle right micrograph. (x 450)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.8.html [1/21/2009 3:54:51 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.9.html

3.9

                                                                  PLATE 3.9. DRONE MOUTHPARTS

                                                                  TOP LEFT Drone mouthparts anterior view. The two
                                                                  dagger-shaped galeae overlie the paired (and somewhat
                                                                  splayed-out) labial palps. The relatively short glossa
                                                                  (tongue) is hidden from view by these mouthparts. At the
                                                                  top of the field hirsute mandibles extend horizontally, at
                                                                  right angles to the galeae and palps. (x 65)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Close-up of the surface of a galea showing
                                                                  several stout, socketed hairs with fluted sides. The hairs
                                                                  arise from the transversely furrowed cuticle. (x 1,600)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Drone mouthparts, posterior view. The
                                                                  very hirsute, relatively short, cylindrical glossa hangs
                                                                  down between the flanking labial palps. (x 55)

                                                                  MIDDLE RIGHT. Distal four segments of the lablurn. (x
                                                                  43)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT Labial palp with its few peg and
                                                                  trichoid sensilla. The tip of the galea is immediately below
the labial palp. (x 170)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.9.html [1/21/2009 3:54:53 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.10.html

3.10

                                                                  PLATE 3.10. DRONE GLOSSA

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Glossa (tongue) protruding out over the
                                                                  retracted galeae of the maxillae. Behind the galeae and
                                                                  rather obscured by them are the paired labial palps. (x 63)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Partially dissected ventral view of the
                                                                  relatively short glossa flanked by the four-segmented labial
                                                                  palps. The length of the drone glossa is less than half that
                                                                  of the worker. Compare with Plate 2.7. (x 65)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Posterior view of the glossa, with further
                                                                  dissection of the mouthparts (bilateral excision of the
                                                                  labial palps). The short glossa hangs down between the
                                                                  right and left galeae, each with hairs on the medial margin.
                                                                  Between the galeae and partly covered by the glossa is the
                                                                  postmentum. The arrow points to an area further magnified
                                                                  in the middle right micrograph. (x 75)

                                            MIDDLE RIGHT. Posterior view of the base of the glossa.
                                            A glimpse of the glossa is on the extreme upper left. On
                                            the right several cuticular hairs of the galea rest on the side
of the postmentum (arrow in bottom left micrograph). (x
270)

BOTTOM RIGHT. Distal tip of the glossa. The expanded, spoonlike tip is called the flabellum. (x 720)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.10.html [1/21/2009 3:54:55 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.11.html

3.11

                                                                  PLATE 3.11. DRONE HEAD, DETACHED,
                                                                  POSTERIOR VIEW

                                                                  MIDDLE. Round occipital foramen ,vith sheared-off
                                                                  tissues protruding out of it, flanked by two crescent-
                                                                  shaped, posterior tentorial pits. Two ventrolaterally
                                                                  situated hair plates are located on the cuticular ridge
                                                                  immediately alongside the occipital foramen. (x 144)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Entire left 28-setae hair plate. (x 550)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the left hair
                                                                  plate showing the socketed nature of each mechanosensory
                                                                  hair. (x 1,760)

                                                                  TOP. Small apodeme at the base of the right tentorial pit in
                                                                  the middle micrograph. The recess leads to the ventral
                                                                  postoccipital tentorial arm. (x 900)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.11.html [1/21/2009 3:54:57 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.12.html

3.12

                                                                  PLATE 3.12. DRONE- CERVIX, DORSAL VIEW

                                                                  TOP Drone cervix (neck). In specimen preparation, the
                                                                  head was extended from the thorax to stretch out and show
                                                                  the extent of the membranous cervix. Flexuous body hairs
                                                                  from the pronotum are in the foreground. The lateral
                                                                  anchorages for this cervical membrane lie above the
                                                                  posterior tentorial pits, while the inedial (main) insertion is
                                                                  onto the run of the occipital foramen. ( x 144)

                                                                  BOTTOM Cuticular scales on the cervix at higher
                                                                  magnification. Each ellipsoidal scale shows one to eight
                                                                  small tubercles projecting from its dorsal surface. (x 2,700)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.12.html [1/21/2009 3:54:58 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.13.html

3.13

                                                                  PLATE 3.13. DRONE CERVIX

                                                                  TOP Dorsolateral hair plate contacting the back of the
                                                                  head (right and middle arrows in inset). These forty
                                                                  trichoid sensilla, seemingly in rows at this viewing angle,
                                                                  are cervical in origin while the branched hairs are from the
                                                                  thoracic episternum. ( x 288)

                                                                  TOP INSET. Survey of the whole, stretched, dorsal cervix.
                                                                  (x 88)

                                                                  BOTTOM. Dorsolateral cervical ridge (left arrow in inset,
                                                                  top micrograph) extending vertically through the center of
                                                                  the field. The lower extremity of the dorsolateral hair plate
                                                                  is at the top of the field (the head is to the left). (x 360)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.13.html [1/21/2009 3:55:00 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.14.html

3.14

                                                                  PLATE 3.14. DRONE CERVIX, VENTRAL VIEW

                                                                  MIDDLE Three types of (uninnervated) cuticular
                                                                  ornamentation (the posterior head is to the top). The
                                                                  branched hairs are from the thorax; the low, elliptical
                                                                  scales are in the posterior half of the cervix (neck); and the
                                                                  taller, tufted, multipointed scales are near the occipital
                                                                  region. (x 144)

                                                                  TOP Overall cuticular hair distribution and density of the
                                                                  anterior cervical tufts. ( x 720)

                                                                  BOTTOM Ventrolateral mechanoreceptor hair plate on the
                                                                  occipital process of the episternum (upper left quadrant).
                                                                  The cuticular "hole" (far left) may be part of an apodeme.
                                                                  (x 800)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.14.html [1/21/2009 3:55:02 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.15.html

3.15

                                                                  PLATE 3.15. DRONE CERVIX, VENTRAL VIEW

                                                                  TOP LEFT Extended cervix (neck) (the head is to the top,
                                                                  the thorax to the bottom). ( X 88)

                                                                  TOP HIGHT Central "lobe" area on the ventral cervix.
                                                                  Cuticular scales III this area are for the most part solitary
                                                                  spines or blebs. Compare with Plate 2.17, the worker
                                                                  cervix. (x 2,200)

                                                                  MIDDLE Cervical membrane with the cervix extended.
                                                                  Each cuticular scale here has five to seven spines, in
                                                                  several lengths. (x 3,600)

                                                                  BOTTOM Cervical membrane with the neck compressed.
                                                                  In this condition the cuticular spines from neighboring
                                                                  scales mesh and seemingly overlap. (x 3,600)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.15.html [1/21/2009 3:55:04 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.16.html

3.16

                                                                  PLATE 3.16. DRONE THORAX

                                                                  Lateral view of the drone thorax.

                                                                  See the discussion accompaying Plate 1.16




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.16.html [1/21/2009 3:55:05 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.17.html

3.17

                                                                  PLATE 3.17. DRONE THORACIC SPIRACLE

                                                                  TOP. First thoracic spiracle somewhat concealed behind
                                                                  the spiracular lobe (arrow). Above the spiracle and to the
                                                                  right is the lateral edge of the tegula; above the tegula and
                                                                  clothed with short unbranched hairs is the large
                                                                  mesonotum. The hairy compound eye fills most of the
                                                                  Lipper left field. (x 56)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. More direct view into the first thoracic
                                                                  spiracle showing the valve. The lobe in the far upper right
                                                                  is the mesothoracic supraepimeron; the lobe immediately
                                                                  below is the mesothoracic intraepimeron. (x 78)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Cutaway view of the left mesothoracic
                                                                  spiracle. Inside the bee the trachea extends directly away
                                                                  from the spiracular opening. At right angles to the trachea
                                                                  is the occlusor muscle of the spiracle. (x 55)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.17.html [1/21/2009 3:55:07 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.18.html

3.18

                                                                  PLATE 3.18. DRONE FOREWING BASE

                                                                  Top. Photomontage of the drone forewing base. At the far
                                                                  left is the head with the hairy compound eye. At the
                                                                  bottom is the spiracular lobe. Three sclerites are in
                                                                  descending order in the right half of the field; most dorsal
                                                                  is the triangular tegula, below which are the supraepimeron
                                                                  and infraepimeron. The pleural sulcus forms the left side
                                                                  margin for the latter pleurite. The main veins of the leading
                                                                  edge of the wing extend to the right (3 o' clock). ( x 3 1)

                                                                  BOTTOM. Close-up of key wing sclerites. The triangular
                                                                  tegula is the dominant sclerite in the left half of the field.
                                                                  To the right of the basal angle of the tegula is the bilobed
                                                                  second axillary sclerite. This plate is regarded as the
                                                                  pivotal sclerite of the wing base. To the right of the second
                                                                  axillary sclerite is a roughly trapezoidal (in outline) sclerite
                                                                  called the median plate. (x 100)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.18.html [1/21/2009 3:55:09 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.19.html

3.19

                                                                  PLATE 3.19. DRONE FOREWING BASE, CLOSE-UP

                                                                  TOP. Drone forewing base (the head is to the top, dorsum
                                                                  to the right) (see Plate 3.18, top micrograph). The probable
                                                                  sensory receptors in the bottom three micrographs are
                                                                  located on the pleural plate (arrow). (x 190)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of a uniquely branched hair
                                                                  and nonsocketed hair above on an area covered by
                                                                  cuticular scales. ( x 1, 175)

                                                                  BOTTOM MIDDLE. Hair in the bottom left micrograph,
                                                                  with the field extended to show the small peglike
                                                                  sensillum. (x 1,700)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the cuticular
                                                                  "peg" in the bottom middle micrograph. The peg is
                                                                  unusual in that it is very flattened, rather than columnar. (x
                                                                  8,500)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.19.html [1/21/2009 3:55:11 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.20.html

3.20 PLATE 3.20. DRONE WING, DORSAL SURFACE

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Drone wing, dorsal surface, near the
                                                                  anterior wing margin and within the ultimate third of the
                                                                  wing. Wing veins show up as dark wide lines meandering
                                                                  through the wing. (x 70)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of the forewing surface
                                                                  showing single rows of socketed setae emanating from the
                                                                  veins. These may be mechanoreceptors involved in
                                                                  monitoring wing speed. (x 280)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Leading edge of the forewing. These setae,
                                                                  which project from the anteriormost vein, are socketed and
                                                                  may possibly be mechanoreceptors. This field is an area
                                                                  about two-thirds of the distance to the wing tip. (x 650)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Vein on the dorsal surface of the forewing
                                                                  showing several ranks of socketed hairs on either side of
                                                                  the wing vein. (x 720)PLATE 3.20. DRONE WING,
                                                                  DORSAL SURFACE




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.20.html [1/21/2009 3:55:13 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.21.html

3.21

                                                                  PLATE 3.21. DRONE WING, VENTRAL SURFACE

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Hind wing, ventral view, at low
                                                                  magnification. Several veins intersect in this field. (x90)

                                                                  TOP LEFT Ventral view, near the tip of hind wing.
                                                                  Exceedingly small, cuticular spines randomly arise in this
                                                                  area. Some scattered pits are also visible. (x 420)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Forewing tip, ventral view. Numerous
                                                                  scattered small, blunt cuticular spines are found on this
                                                                  surface. The pits represent the bases of the short
                                                                  counterpart spines arising on the reverse surface of this
                                                                  wing. ( x 130)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the ventral
                                                                  forewing in the top right micrograph. The spine density is
                                                                  1/900 micro m^2. (x 750)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.21.html [1/21/2009 3:55:14 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.22.html

3.22

                                                                  PLATE 3.22. DRONE WING HOOKS

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Leading edge of the hind wing The
                                                                  hooks engage the posterior margin of the forewing only
                                                                  during flight, when the forewing and hind wing beat as
                                                                  one. Microtrichia are abundant over the wing surface. (x
                                                                  136)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Non-hook-bearing portion of the hind
                                                                  wing in the bottom left micrograph. Socketed hairs, both
                                                                  long and very short, project from this vein. ( x 800)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Photorriontage of the ventral forewing hind
                                                                  margin, around which the hooks engage, and the hooked
                                                                  leading edge of the hind wing. (x 110)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Close-up of the wing hooks. These are
                                                                  somewhat larger than those of the worker. Socketed small
                                                                  peg organs are abundant on the surface engaged by the
                                                                  trailing edge of the forewing. (x 720)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.22.html [1/21/2009 3:55:16 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.23.html

3.23

                                                                  PLATE 3.23. DRONE FORELEG

                                                                  MIDDLE. Photomontage of the entire left foreleg.
                                                                  Proximally to distally, after the coxa (first leg segment
                                                                  from the body) are the trochanter, femur, tibia, basitarsus
                                                                  (with antenna cleaner notch), three short tarsal segments,
                                                                  pretarsus, and claws. ( x 31)

                                                                  TOP. Prothorax, ventral view. Two scaled coxae
                                                                  (medioanterior surfaces) abut on either side to a smooth-
                                                                  surfaced basisternum. Mechanoreceptor hair plates of the
                                                                  coxae engage the lateral basisternum (arrows). (x 168)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT Lateral edge of the coxa extending
                                                                  diagonally through the center of the field. A
                                                                  mechanoreceptor hair plate on the lateroanterior surface
                                                                  engages the adjacent sternum. (x 93)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.23.html [1/21/2009 3:55:17 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.24.html

3.24

                                                                  PLATE 3.24. DRONE FORELEG, CLOSE-UP

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Tibia-basitarsus joint, the region of the
                                                                  antenna cleaning apparatus (comb). The fibula (upper
                                                                  right) is a clasplike spur that closes over the semicircular
                                                                  toothed notch (rimmed with comblike hairs). The antenna
                                                                  is inserted in this enclosure and drawn upward to clean
                                                                  debris from its cuticular receptors. The fibula fits into the
                                                                  proximal portion of the basitarsus to form an embrace
                                                                  around all antenna surfaces. (x 161)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Dorsal view of the fibula showing the notch
                                                                  of the antenna cleaner. From this angle it is apparent that
                                                                  the fibula is contoured into several lobes to make better
                                                                  contact with the circular (in cross section) antenna. (x 195)

                                                                  MIDDLE RIGHT Higher magnification of the tibia-
                                                                  basitarsus joint. A patch of unusual cuticular setae is on the
                                                                  tibia (see the top right micrograph). These setae have
                                                                  twisted blunt tips with several parallel ridges along the
                                                                  long axis of the hair. ( x 496)

BOTTOM RIGHT. Femur-tibia joint. The intersegmental
membrane is studded with short, acute cuticular spines. (x 770)

BOTTOM LEFT Femur-tibia joint. The tibia is very flexed relative to the femur. The long, straight,
unbranched hairs of the compound eye are in the far background. (x 280)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.24.html [1/21/2009 3:55:19 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.25.html

3.25

                                                                  PLATE 3.25. DRONE FOREFOOT AND HIND FOOT

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Survey of the hind foot. The claws are simple,
                                                                  unlobed, hollow hooks fringed with (probably sensory)
                                                                  hairs. (x 100)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Arolium (from the hind foot) showing its
                                                                  hirsute medial surface and glabrous, grooved exterior
                                                                  (compare with Plate 1.34, the queen forefoot and hind
                                                                  foot). Three long spines hang down from the median
                                                                  sclerite above. ( x 400)

                                                                  MIDDLE. Higher magnification of the hairs lining the
                                                                  medial surface of the arolium. (x 4,250)

                                             BOTTOM. Forefoot (prothoracic foot). In the foreground
                                             is the median sclerite, from which extend four stout,
                                             slightly curved spines. The basal portions of the right and
                                             left claws are on either side of the median sclerite. The
                                             ventrodistal margin of the fifth tarsal segment arises over
                                             the claw bases and median sclerite. Left and right sensory
                                             hair plates are evident above the claws; when the claws are
raised they contact these putative mechanoreceptors to
inform the drone whether its claws are extended or flexed. (x 510)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.25.html [1/21/2009 3:55:21 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.26.html

3.26

                                                                  PLATE 3.26. DRONE MIDDLE LEG

                                                                  TOP. Photomontage of the left middle (mesothoracic) leg.
                                                                  The coxa is obscured but, proximally to distally, the
                                                                  trochanter, femur tibia (with spine or wax spur pointed
                                                                  downward), basitarsus and three additional tarsomeres, and
                                                                  the pretarsus with claws are visible. ( x 31)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT . tibia-basitarsus Joint. This is a
                                                                  monocondylic (single point) articulation. The relatively
                                                                  large size and stoutness of the tibial spine are evident. ( x
                                                                  93)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Tibia-basitarsus Joint. This view and
                                                                  magnification make apparent the differences in the
                                                                  cuticular surfaces between the scalelike tibial base, the
                                                                  pebble-grained tibial spine, and the smooth head of the
                                                                  basitarsus. The two forms of setae (branched and simple
                                                                  trichoid) on the tibia are visible at this articulation, as well
                                                                  as the scales on the mtersegmental membrane at this Joint.
                                                                  ( x 355)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.26.html [1/21/2009 3:55:24 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.27.html

3.27

                                                                  PLATE 3.27. DRONE LEG BASES

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Bases of the middle (mesothoracic) and hind
                                                                  (metathoracic) legs (the abdomen is to the left). In the
                                                                  foreground, proximally to distally, are the coxa, trochanter,
                                                                  and a small portion of the femur of the hind leg. The arrow
                                                                  indicates the trochanter-coxa Joint, which is further
                                                                  magnified in the bottom right micrograph. ( x 60)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Scale-studded intersegmental membrane
                                                                  (center) covering the articulation between the hind coxa
                                                                  and trochanter. The proximal surface of the trochanter has
                                                                  about two dozen short, sharp, socketed hairs that may be
                                                                  mechanoreceptors that contact the coxa In the course of
                                                                  locomotion and inform the nervous system as to leg
                                                                  position. (x 240)

                                                                  BOTTOM. Trochanter-coxa joint (arrow in top right
                                                                  micropraph (x 298)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.27.html [1/21/2009 3:55:26 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.28.html

3.28

                                                                  PLATE 3.28. DRONE HIND LEG

                                                                  TOP. Photomontage showing entire left hind
                                                                  (metathoracic) leg and the coxa, trochanter, and femur of
                                                                  the adjacent leg. At the distal extremity of the completely
                                                                  exposed leg are the two claws of the pretarsal segment,
                                                                  followed proximally by four tarsal subsegments, the most
                                                                  proximal of which connects to the elongate flattened
                                                                  basitarsus. The basitarsus articulates with the tibia. The
                                                                  femur, trochanter, and coxa are in a distal to proximal
                                                                  succession. No pollen gathering or transfer modifications
                                                                  such as on these segments in 'the worker are present on the
                                                                  drone hind leg. Compare with Plates 2.28, 2.29, 2.30, and
                                                                  2.31. (x3l)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Lateral view of the metathoracic
                                                                  pretarsus (distal edge at the top). The setae are relatively
                                                                  sparse and extremely short. (x 37)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Medial surface of the metathoracic
                                                                  pretarsus (distal edge at the top). This side is characterized
                                                                  by a dense pile of rather long setae. (x 34)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.28.html [1/21/2009 3:55:28 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.29.html

3.29

                                                                  PLATE 3.29. DRONE HIND FOOT

                                                                  BOTTOM. Pretarsus and fifth tarsal segment. The claws
                                                                  gape widely to better reveal the soft, pursed medial lobe
                                                                  (arolium). Five long, curved setae emanate from the
                                                                  median sclerite, which, in turn, articulates with the last
                                                                  tarsal segment. Rows of short trichold sensilla descend
                                                                  over the dorsum of the last tarsal segment. (x 180)

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Three tarsal segments of the hind
                                                                  (metathoracic) foot. The planta (seen here as the upper
                                                                  surface, which is the best orientation for the viewer),
                                                                  covered with short hairs, contacts the substratum. (x 110)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Lateral view of the pretarsus and last (fifth)
                                                                  tarsal segment showing the contracted nature of the
                                                                  arolium and the upright orientation of the medial sclerite.
                                                                  The five trichoid sensilla arise from the medial sclerite at
                                                                  different levels. (x 143)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.29.html [1/21/2009 3:55:29 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.30.html

3.30

                                                                  Lateral view of the drone gaster (abdomen).

                                                                  See the discussion accompaying Plate 1.36.




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.30.html [1/21/2009 3:55:31 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.31.html

3.31

                                                                  PLATE 3.31. DRONE PETIOLE, DORSAL VIEW

                                                                  TOP. Slightly curved anterior margin of the propodeum, at
                                                                  the top of the field. The membranous connective of the
                                                                  (dorsal) petiole is in the center. (x 100)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Close-up of the dorsal membranous
                                                                  region in the top micrograph, with the connective cut.
                                                                  Longitudinal wrinkles and copious scales are prominent in
                                                                  this region. (x 168)

                                                                  MIDDLE RIGHT. Apodeme for wing muscle attachment,
                                                                  immediately anterior to the petiole. ( x 234)

                                                                  BOTTOM. Higher magnification of the cuticular scales of
                                                                  the dorsal membranous wall of the petiole. Five to seven
                                                                  spines of several lengths project from each scale. (x 3,230)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.31.html [1/21/2009 3:55:32 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.32.html

3.32

                                                                  PLATE 3.32. DRONE PETIOLE, ABDOMEN
                                                                  DETACHED

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Cross-sectional cut through the membranous
                                                                  petiole. The longitudinally seamed, scaly membrane (at 12
                                                                  o'clock) and the thoracic cavity immediately beneath are
                                                                  exposed. Two sizable muscles with sheaths (at 3 and 9
                                                                  o'clock) are visible; these assist in elevating the abdomen.
                                                                  (x 50)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Reverse view of the top left micrograph
                                                                  showing the crosssectioned anterior end of the abdomen
                                                                  (gaster). The arrow points to the hair plate that is further
                                                                  magnified in the middle right micrograph. (x 50)

                                                                  MIDDLE RIGHT. Dorsolateral hair plate of the petiole
                                                                  (arrow in top right micrograph). These mechanoreceptors
                                                                  monitor the gravitational pull of the gaster onto the thorax
                                                                  via the petiole. The socketed, unbranched hairs are
                                                                  mechanosensors. (x 300)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the setae of
the hair plate. (X 1,000)

BOTTOM LEFT. Longitudinal section through a cuticular spur in the petiolar region. The laminated
appearance of the exocuticle is apparent. (x 8,640)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.32.html [1/21/2009 3:55:35 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.33.html

3.33

                                                                  PLATE 3.33. DRONE PETIOLAR HAIR PLATE,
                                                                  OBLIQUE VIEW

                                                                  BOTTOM. Petiole, the junction between the first and
                                                                  second abdominal segments. This joint ensures great
                                                                  flexibility of the abdomen relative to the thorax.
                                                                  Monitoring this movement and providing the bee with
                                                                  information on the alignment of the thorax to the abdomen
                                                                  relative to gravity are several (mechanoreceptor) hair
                                                                  plates that are externally placed proprioceptors. One such
                                                                  hair plate is visible; the setae (sensilla) probably make
                                                                  contact with the dorsal wall of the petiole of the first
                                                                  abdominal segment. The black and white diagonal bar
                                                                  indicates the alignment of body segments (the head is to
                                                                  the upper left). (x 85)

                                                                  TOP. Higher magnification of the contact zone between
                                                                  the hair plate receptors and the dorsal petiole. These four
                                                                  dozen sensory hairs are arrayed in various directions, so
                                                                  several of them contact the petiolar protuberance at any
                                                                  one time at any degree of flexion, which ensures a constant
                                                                  monitoring of abdominal position. ( x 430)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.33.html [1/21/2009 3:55:36 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.34.html

3.34

                                                                  PLATE 3.34. DRONE SPIRACLES

                                                                  TOP. Photomontage showing primarily the first
                                                                  (propodeal) and second segments of the abdomen (dorsum
                                                                  at the top). Spiracles are visible (arrows) on these two
                                                                  segments. The wings have been removed. (x 31)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Spiracle on the first abdominal segment
                                                                  at moderate magnification. This spiracle is somewhat
                                                                  larger than the others, and its elongate-oval rim differs
                                                                  from the more rounded appearance of the succeeding
                                                                  spiracles. ( x 63)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of the first abdominal spiracle.
                                                                  The operculum (plate) covering this spiracle has been
                                                                  damaged in specimen preparation; in the intact bee this
                                                                  plate can be pulled down by an occlusor muscle, much like
                                                                  a window shade, thus shutting off this spiracle from the
                                                                  outside. The operculum is never completely open and its
                                                                  excursion is not large, so this situation permits only a
                                                                  minimal aperture. (x 170)

MIDDLE RIGHT. Two spiracles, one each on the second
(left) and third (right) abdominal tergites. The more circular nature of these openings is evident. These
spiracles are noticeably larger than those of the worker and queen. ( x 3 1)

BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the third abdominal spiracle. The circular depression in the
cuticle leads to an oval pit (lower right) that connects directly to the underlying trachea via a valve
mechanism capable of occluding the spiracle atrium from the trachea. The branched hairs and valvular
apparatus may be barriers that keep mites from entering the trachea through this spiracle. ( x 250)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.34.html [1/21/2009 3:55:38 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.35.html

3.35

                                                                  PLATE 3.35. DRONE SPIRACLES, CLOSE-UP

                                                                  TOP. Survey of a portion of the second and third
                                                                  abdominal tergites showing the spiracle on the third. The
                                                                  posterior margin of the second abdominal tergite, which is
                                                                  sparsely covered with branched body hairs, is visible on
                                                                  the left. On the anterior margin of the third tergite are few
                                                                  setae, but the teardrop-shaped spiracular opening is
                                                                  surrounded by socketed hairs on its dorsal, ventral, and
                                                                  posterior margins. (x 175)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Close-up of the spiracular opening.
                                                                  Inside the spiracle is the cuticular atrial wall, which bulges
                                                                  out somewhat and is covered with very short hairs.
                                                                  Atmospheric air passes over these finer setae and gains
                                                                  entrance to the trachea directly behind the atrium via a
                                                                  small channel. This canal can be opened when the muscles
                                                                  of its valve relax. (x 400)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the small,
                                                                  unsocketed hairs of the medial wall of the spiracular
                                                                  atrium. The function of these hairs may be to remove
                                                                  particulate matter from the airstream. ( x 800)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.35.html [1/21/2009 3:55:41 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.36.html

3.36

                                                                  PLATE 3.36. DRONE ABDOMEN, DORSAL SURFACE

                                                                  TOP. Photomontage of the dorsal portion of the left
                                                                  abdomen. About half of the second, third, and fourth
                                                                  abdominal tergites are visible in their total lateral expanse.
                                                                  (x 40)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Higher magnification of a sector of the
                                                                  lateral surface of an abdominal tergite showing the
                                                                  furrowlike cuticular relief. Sparse, unbranched, socketed
                                                                  hairs are visible. The pores (at 4 and 10 o'clock) are
                                                                  probably orifices through which hairs once projected. (x
                                                                  775)

                                                                  BOTTOM MIDDLE. Highly magnified area of abdominal
                                                                  tergite showing both socketed smooth setae and a branched
                                                                  body hair. A pore is visible (arrow). (x 1,400)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of a cuticular
                                                                  pore on an abdominal tergite (arrow in bottom middle
                                                                  micrograph). This orifice has founded lips and no cuticular
                                                                  lid. (x 14,000)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.36.html [1/21/2009 3:55:43 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.37.html

3.37

                                                                  PLATE 3.37. DRONE ABDOMEN, VENTRAL
                                                                  SURFACE

                                                                  LEFT. Photomontage in low magnification of a survey
                                                                  view of the ventral surface of the gaster (abdomen). The
                                                                  terminalia are visible (bottom right of the field). The
                                                                  mesomeres and other parts of the male genitalia are
                                                                  recessed behind and beneath the terminal (tenth)
                                                                  abdominal sternite. In specimen preparation, the internal
                                                                  gut contents probably were reduced; such shrinkage would
                                                                  cause the abdominal sclerites to appear compressed and to
                                                                  overlap more than in life. ( x 40)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Higher magnification of the abdominal
                                                                  sternal surface showing the scalelike appearance of the
                                                                  epicuticle. Only branched body hairs are found in this area.
                                                                  ( x 650)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Close-up of the scalelike cuticular
                                                                  sculpturing on a ventral abdominal sternite. Portions of
                                                                  two branched body hairs are visible. (x 1,400)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.37.html [1/21/2009 3:55:45 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.38.html

3.38

                                                                  PLATE 3.38. DRONE GENITAL ORIFICE

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Terminal segments of the abdomen, frontal
                                                                  view. Two (paired) penis valves clasp the phallotreme, in
                                                                  which the penis is barely visible in its inverted position.
                                                                  Lateral to each of the penis valves is a "bewhiskered"
                                                                  paramere. Dorsal and ventral to the penis valves are
                                                                  sectors of intersegmental membrane. Within the dorsal
                                                                  intersegmental membrane (left), just above the left
                                                                  paramere, is the greatly reduced ninth tergite. The
                                                                  sclerotized "roof" for these organs is called the eighth
                                                                  tergite; immediately below the apex of that roof is a black
                                                                  crescent, the anus. Just below the anus is a platelike area
                                                                  called the proctiger. The eighth sternite forms the ventral
                                                                  V-shaped enclosure for these terminalia. ( x 40)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Cuticular sculpturing of the intersegmental
                                                                  membrane surrounding the paramere-penis valve complex.
                                                                  (x 484)

                                                 BOTTOM. Higher magnification of the left paramere in
                                                 the top left micrograph showing kinds of setae that arise on
                                                 the parameral plate and lie over the left penis valve. Nine
setae also arise from the lateral portion of the paramere. Immediately above and to the left of the
paramere is the very small ninth tergite. The eighth tergite and sternite form the upper and lower
diagonal sclerite margins respectively. (x 168)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.38.html [1/21/2009 3:55:48 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.39.html

3.39

                                                                  PLATE 3.39. DRONE GENITAL ORIFICE, INTERIOR
                                                                  VIEW

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Frontal view of the terminal segments
                                                                  of the abdomen. Because of collapse of the last segments,
                                                                  the proctiger and anus are hidden under the eighth tergite,
                                                                  whose arched posterior margin is visible at the top of the
                                                                  field. The arrow points to the phallotreme, which is further
                                                                  magnified in the bottom left micrograph. (x 75)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Phallotreme, the external opening of a
                                                                  deep endophallic pouch (arrow in bottom right
                                                                  micrograph). (x 510)

                                                                  TOP. Cuticular scales on the dorsal aspect of the last
                                                                  (seventh) tergite. Each scale has four to six spinelike
                                                                  processes in essentially two size classes. (x 1,085)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.39.html [1/21/2009 3:55:52 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.40.html

3.40

                                                                  PLATE 3.40. DRONE GENITALIA

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Vestibulum (bottom of the field). On either
                                                                  side of the vestibulum are the lateral horns or cornuti
                                                                  (arrows). The principal feature is the cervix of the tubelike
                                                                  penis. Chevronlike sclerites cover the ventral wall of the
                                                                  cervix. ( x 3 1)

                                                                  MIDDLE LEFT. Base of the genitalia, located
                                                                  immediately below the field in the top left micrograph.
                                                                  The ventral plate of the vestibulum of the penis is covered
                                                                  with flexuous setae. On both sides of the vestibulum are
                                                                  the cornuti (external genital lobes). (x 31)

                                                                  BOTTOM. Tufts of spicules on the medial wall of the
                                                                  cervix of the penis. (x 441)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. Higher magnification of the wall surface of
                                                                  the male genital duct. (x 300)

                                               MIDDLE RIGHT. Surface of the horn (cornutus). The
                                               dorsal and lateral surfaces are papillate while the ventral
surface is relatively smooth with longitudinal folds. (x 100)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.40.html [1/21/2009 3:55:54 PM]
 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.41.html

3.41

                                                                  PLATE 3.41. SPERM

                                                                  TOP LEFT. Floor of the cervix of the penis. Profuse small
                                                                  spines (spicules) line this intima. Several slender sperm are
                                                                  barely visible lying atop the spicules. (x 241)

                                                                  BOTTOM LEFT. Massed, intertwined spermatozoa. (x
                                                                  3,900)

                                                                  TOP RIGHT. One entire sperm. (x 700)

                                                                  UPPER MIDDLE RIGHT. One sperm head. The small
                                                                  nodules of the head are probably a manifestation of the
                                                                  acrosome. (x 16,000)

                                                                  LOWER MIDDLE RIGHT. Head (right) and tail (left) of a
                                                                  sperm. (x 3,000)

                                                                  BOTTOM RIGHT. Higher magnification of the sperm tail.
                                                                  The linear grooves may relate to the interspaces between
                                                                  adjacent peripheral microtubule singlets in the axoneme of
                                                                  the tail. (x 10,000)




 file:///E|/Jason/beebookNew/drones/3.41.html [1/21/2009 3:55:56 PM]
