PPP-116
POL-9

The Complex Life
of the Honey Bee
Environmental, Biological, and Chemical Challenges to Colony Health

The Complex Life
of the Honey Bee

Environmental, Biological, and Chemical Challenges to Colony Health
Fred Whitford, Director, Purdue Pesticide Programs
Thomas Steeger, Senior Science Advisor, Environmental Protection Agency
Max Feken, Ecotoxicologist, Syngenta Crop Protection
Christian Krupke, Extension Field Crops Specialist, Purdue University Entomology
Greg Hunt, Extension Honey Bee Specialist, Purdue University Entomology
Reed Johnson, Assistant Professor of Entomology, The Ohio State University
Corey Gerber, Director, Purdue Crop Diagnostic Training and Research Center
John Obermeyer, Integrated Pest Management Specialist, Purdue University Entomology
Krispn Given, Apiculture Specialist, Purdue University Entomology
Kevin Leigh Smith, Editor, Purdue Agricultural Communication
Find more publications in the Protecting Pollinators series
by visiting the Purdue Extension Education Store,
www.edustore.purdue.edu.

A Complicated Question with a Complicated Answer .............. 4
The Buzz Surrounding Bees ................................................................................. 7
A Marvel of Nature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 10
Building and Maintaining a City of Wax ................................................ 24
The Biology of the Honey Bee ........................................................................ 28
Death is a Way of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................................................. 38
The Four P’s that Affect Bees........................................................................... 40
Routes of Pesticide Exposure from Field to Hive .......................... 42
Everything is Poisonous at Some Dose ............................................ 45
The EPA Risk Assessment Process ............................................................... 46
The Honey Bee as a Surrogate for Insect Pollinators .......... 48
A Host of Questions to Answer................................................................ 49
Determining Many Routes of Exposure........................................... 52
Formulating a Working Hypothesis ................................................... 53
Analyzing the Data. . . . . . . .................................................................................... 53
Comparing Exposure and Effects in a Tiered Approach ...... 54
Tier 1 — Effects to Individual Honey Bees.................................... 56
Tiers 2 and 3 — Colony-level Assessments................................... 59
Is the Risk Quotient Above or Below Levels of Concern? ..... 61
Registration Decisions Go Through Extensive Reviews......... 62
The Label Puts the Risk Assessment to the Test ............................ 63
Moving Beyond the Label .................................................................................. 64
Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................................................... 65
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 68
Appendix: Descriptions of EPA Testing Protocols ........................ 69
Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................................................................................... 75
Disclaimer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................................................................................... 75
Cover photo © Eric Tourneret

3

A Complicated Question
with a Complicated Answer
Are honey bees in decline?
It seems like a simple question to ask. Yet, you can
watch a television program or read an article that reports
honey bees are in a perilous position. They report that if
current trends continue, it will alter the way humans eat,
or at least drive up the costs of our favorite fruits, nuts,
and vegetables. Conversely, another story will argue that
the decline in honey bees is contrived, and the facts do
not support the conclusion that the bee industry is in
dire straits.
At times contentious and controversial, some reports
are anecdotal and use speculation and unsubstantiated
facts laced with emotional opinions. Other discussions

are based on known facts and scientific evidence, but
fall short of providing important perspective on the
difficulties of maintaining honey bees — either professionally (as in commercial or sideline operations) or
privately (as in backyard beekeeping).
How can these reports have such divergent perspectives? As in most debates, the answer to whether bees
and other pollinators are in trouble probably lies in a
careful analysis of science-based information surrounding the debate.
Discussions and debates often begin with the rather
politically- and emotionally-charged words and phrases
used in the first minutes of any discussion concerning

A honey bee yard seemingly tucked away from harm.

4

whether bees are healthy or unhealthy. You’ll often hear
phrases like “bee decline” and “colony collapse disorder.”
In many cases, these explicit terms become the headline,
because they portray powerful mental images to the
audience.
You might ask yourself, “How would I define these
terms?” And, if a definition could be agreed upon,
“How would I measure them?” Without some context
to their meaning, bee decline, colony collapse disorder,
and other terms can be rendered meaningless and
confuse the issue.
Scientists, government officials, conservation
groups, and industry professionals are asking plenty
of questions about why beekeepers (both commercial and hobbyists) are seeing increased colony losses.
One baseline often reported is that in a typical year,
28 percent of honey bee hives die during the winter
season. Annual losses may be higher; this number is
a source of considerable debate.
Whatever the annual baseline loss may be, the
percentage of yearly losses began to routinely exceed
that long-term average about a decade ago. When
that happened, experienced beekeepers took notice,
and many have voiced their concerns about the
viability of beekeeping.
Any threat to beekeeping represents a threat to
agriculture, specifically the production of fresh fruits,
nuts and vegetables. This has raised the profile of the
“honey bee decline” story and captured the public’s
attention. We will discuss the potential causes for these
trends in this publication, but regardless of the causes
(at least in the short-term) these losses represent an
unwelcome challenge for beekeepers. Left unchecked,
these causes could potentially lead to more serious and
widespread negative consequences.
Everyone from beekeepers to conservationists who
want to protect diverse habitats want “The Answer”
for the cause of bee declines to be proven using the
best available science. While individuals search for a
single cause, scientists continue to assert that, as with
many biological questions, there are multiple factors
associated with declines in pollinator health. The more
we learn, the more the complexities become apparent.

KEY STRESSORS TO
HONEY BEE POPULATIONS

key
are
tes
i
m

N
IO

D

ti c

o ra g e

UT

la c

k of f

RI
TIO
N

moving th
e

h

ria
cte

EN

ac

,v

ba
SE
EA
IS

EMer
AG eep
M A N bee k
pr

fun
gu
s

s,
iru

i
TRANSP ve
OR
TA
T

ASITES
PAR

T

es

N

PESTICIDES l use
ch e m

ic a

Even so, this does not mean there are no solutions.
We already know a lot about the threats to pollinators
and pollinator research is more active than ever. For
example, we know that the ectoparasite mite Varroa
destructor arrived in the United States in the 1980s and
is the single most devastating enemy of both managed
and feral bees in the United States.

5

The honey bee on the left has deformed wing virus.

Other key stressors to honey bee populations
include:
• Parasites like tracheal mites (Acarapis woodi),
small hive beetle, and wax moths
• Diseases (such as the fungus Nosema ceranae),
bacteria (such as American foul brood), and
viruses (such as deformed wing virus)
• Lack of suitable forage (poor nutrition) from
loss of habitat due to farming, increased human
populations, and new construction
• Pesticide exposure to honey bee foragers and
their developing young (brood)
• Beekeeper management practices, which
include the stress of transporting honey bees
across the country for pollination services

Many fruits and vegetables depend on honey bees for pollination.

There are multiple factors associated with declines
in honey bee health and outright colony losses. But the
most controversial is pesticides, because this risk factor
involves a wide range of stakeholders who agree that
both pesticides and pollinators are important to
agriculture.
This publication explores the roles pesticides may
play in bee health, examines the latest knowledge in
this fast-developing field of research, and discusses the
regulatory effort to determine the risk of pesticides to
honey bees and other pollinators. To interpret the role
stressors like pesticides may play in influencing bee
biology and health, it is important to understand bee
biology. So, we will begin by examining that biology.

While there will always be disagreements about the
causes and effects of declines in hives, beekeepers, agriculturists, scientists, conservationists, and policymakers all agree that honey bees play a pivotal role in crop
production, availability, prices, food security, and the
economy.
A critical first step in protecting that role in the future
is to outline the current state of knowledge surrounding
the debate.

6

The Buzz Surrounding Bees
Though small, the honey bee (Apis mellifera) has become
the center of an intense national and international debate.
Starting in the early 1980s, commercial beekeepers noticed that it was increasingly difficult to keep honey bees
alive through the winter. A worried commercial beekeeping industry asked university and USDA bee specialists
and researchers to address why this was occurring.
Below, we summarize the recent history behind some
of the key factors — tracheal mites, Varroa mites, and
colony collapse disorder — known to affect honey bee
populations in North America.

Tracheal Mites

One of the initial key contributors to declining bee
populations was the tracheal mite (Acarapsis woodi),
which was introduced from Mexico into a Texas apiary.
From that first detection in Texas, the tracheal mite
quickly spread throughout the United States.
The microscopic tracheal mite enters a honey bee’s
respiratory system through its spiracles, which are
breathing holes that lead directly to the bee’s tracheae.
Tracheae serve as breathing tubes, carrying oxygen
to a honey bee’s cells. When tracheal mites infest a bee,
they effectively clog these tubes, reduce oxygen flow,
and weaken the bee.
Losses from tracheal mites forced some apiaries out
of business. Researchers found that when 30 percent of
the honey bees in a hive are infested with tracheal mites,
the hive was more susceptible to cold winter temperatures. This was largely due to bees not maintaining a
warm enough temperature within the hive cluster. Some
apiaries reported that half of their hives died over the
winter following the introduction of tracheal mites.

This photograph shows a tracheal mite viewed through a microscope.
© Scott Camazine

If there was a silver lining to the story, it was that honey
bees and beekeepers developed various strategies to
reduce tracheal mite infestations. Although tracheal
mites continue to harm some colonies, the problem
has mostly subsided into the background of honey bee
health issues. For the beekeepers who remained after
the initial tracheal mite invasion, they observed that the
honey bee industry slowly began to recover.

7

Varroa Mites

This is particularly unfortunate for the colony because
a queen bee stops laying eggs in the fall, and the hive
relies on heathy bees that can live through the winter to
raise brood in the spring. Although it has been decades
since the Varroa have been introduced, honey bees have
not been able to overcome its devastating effects as they
were able to with tracheal mites.
Throughout the 1990s, apiaries continued to make
honey and provide pollination services despite the
challenges presented by mite infestations. Beekeepers
were forced to replace lost hives each year by splitting
and placing healthy colonies into vacated hives, which
stressed colonies even more. The result was a rapidly
rising cost in agriculture.

However, that good news was soon supplanted when a
new and far more serious threat was introduced. The aggressive Varroa mite was inadvertently introduced to U.S.
honey bees around 1987. Domestic honey bees that had
no previous association with this mite were extremely
susceptible. As a result, apiaries recovering from tracheal
mite infestation were decimated by the Varroa mite.

This Varroa mite locates itself strategically to avoid being groomed off by
its honey bee host. Although mites are frequently found on adult bees, the
mites most seriously affect larvae. © Alex Wild

Varroa mites are an external parasite that feed on the
hemolymph (insect blood). It feeds off adult honey bees
and their developing young (larvae and pupae). Varroa
mites also transmit deadly viruses — like mosquitoes can
vector viruses to humans and other mammals. Mite infestations can kill pupae outright, and many of the adult
bees that survive to emerge from pupal cells show symptoms of deformed wing virus, which can be vectored by
the mites.
Deformed wing virus can render the bee wings crinkled and undeveloped. Bees infected with this virus cannot fly, so they cannot function properly as part of the
colony. The virus weakens the bee and eventually kills it.
Varroa infestation in the hive typically peaks in the
fall. Between the damage caused by the direct feeding of
mites and damage caused by deformed wing virus (and
other viruses), the hive loses a significant amount of its
adult labor force. These losses make it more difficult for
the bees to overwinter.

After feeding in the cell on the developing larva and pupa, this Varroa mite
emerges with the adult honey bee. © Scott Camazine

Colony Collapse Disorder

In 2006 and 2007, a phenomenon known as Colony
Collapse Disorder (CCD) made headline news across the
country. CCD was initially defined based on symptoms:
adult bees declined and the colony collapsed over the
course of a few weeks, usually leaving the queen and a
small number of workers in a colony with nectar, pollen,
and brood still in the cells. CCD was never clearly
defined, but the spectacular disappearance of bees
gripped the public’s imagination in a way that continues
today, even though the CCD syndrome may not have
been as widespread or as long-lasting as media reports
suggested.

8

Each year, beekeepers truck millions of bees to California’s Central Valley to pollinate almonds. © Smithers Viscient

Growers of fruits, nuts, and vegetables who depended
on commercial beekeepers for pollination services began
to worry if there would be enough honey bees for pollination. What had historically been taken for granted,
took on a different meaning when the number of hives
available for pollination services were significantly
reduced (and therefore more expensive to rent).
In particular, almond growers provide the most
compelling example of how much one agricultural crop
relies on honey bee pollination services. California’s
Central Valley grows approximately 80 percent of the
world’s almonds. California almond growers rely exclusively on honey bees for crop pollination, which requires
more than 1.8 million hives, or about two hives per acre.
More than half of all of the managed honey bee
colonies in the United States are required to pollinate
almonds every single year. The cost for commercial

pollination is about $300 million or about 10 percent of
the total production costs for almonds. The cost to rent a
single hive has increased from $15 to $30 to around $200
because the availability of colonies has become limited,
the costs of maintaining the colonies has increased, and
California growers have increased almond production.
Ultimately, all of these factors are reflected in higher
almond prices for consumers.
This is just a single example — there are dozens more
with relevance for crops all over the world.
But there is more to honey bees than the services
they provide, and understanding their remarkable
biology is important to answer the question we posed
at the beginning (Are honey bees in decline?). In the
sections that follow, we will explore the amazing and
complex biology of this insect before discussing how
some of the stressors (including pesticides) affect them.

9

A Marvel of Nature
Human civilization and
We are now learning
honey bees have coexisted
that pollination by wild bee
for thousands of years. As a
species also contributes
direct benefit, honey bees
substantially to yields in
provide us with products
some fruits and vegetables,
such as honey (a natural
including many types of melsweetener) and wax (for
ons, stone fruits, and berries.
making candles and other
Bumble bees (Bombus speproducts). Honey remains
cies) are particularly wellone of nature’s best and
suited for pollinating plants
most versatile examples of
such as blueberries and toA honey’s color and taste are determined by the flowers in bloom.
a naturally produced prodmatoes. Alkali bees (Nomia meuct used in cooking, beverages, cosmetics, and medilanderi) and alfalfa leafcutter bees (Megachile rotundata)
cines. Annual U.S. honey sales amount to $320 million.
are important for pollinating alfalfa grown for seed.
Americans consume 450 million pounds of honey each
year, more than half of that honey is imported.
While honey is an important bee product, the greatest
value of managed bees is in the pollination of nut, fruit,
and vegetable crops. For example, commercial beekeepers transport tens of thousands of hives on semi-trucks
to farms growing crops that require insect pollination.
Bee managers transport hives to pollinate almonds in
California; blueberries in Maine, Georgia, and Florida;
cherries in Michigan; apples in Washington and New
York; melons in Indiana; cranberries in Wisconsin; and
sunflowers in North Dakota.
Some plants are self-pollinated (this includes most
grains or oilseed crops, tomatoes, peppers, peas, peanuts, and citrus), and other plants are wind-pollinated
(including corn, soybeans, walnuts, and pecans). But
many flowering plants require insects to move pollen
Cucurbit crops (including pumpkins and cantaloupes) need honey bees to
from male to female parts to produce a fruit, vegetable,
produce desirable fruit.
or nut. A large percentage of the most colorful food
items in the produce section of grocery stores must be
pollinated by honey bees and other pollinators.

10

HONEY BEE FACTS
A worker bee only produces
1/12th of a teaspoon of honey
in her lifetime.
It takes about 250 bees to
fill one cell with honey.
One teaspoon of honey takes
5,000 flower visits.

The availability of many of fruits is tied directly to pollinators.

A typical colony will visit
225,000 flowers per day.

1

lb.

Bees visit 2 million flowers
to make a pound of honey.

Honey bees are fuel efficient.

While honey bees are well-known pollinators, other insects are also important pollinators,
including the bumble bee, alfalfa leafcutter bee, and alkali bee. © Smithers Viscient

Honey bees can visit 50–100
flowers during a single trip to
collect nectar.

Add it all up, and honey bees and other pollinators
are directly or indirectly responsible for one-third of
the food Americans consume with an annual economic
value of $19 billion. Without the commercial beekeeping
industry and the pollination services the bees provide
to agriculture, much of what we purchase at the grocery
store would be far more difficult to find and considerably
more expensive.
Worldwide, there are seven honey bee species, but
Apis mellifera is the species hobbyists and commercial
beekeepers use most often. The native range of A. mellifera is in Europe, and there are different geographical
races named after their respective areas of origin. These
include the Italian, German Black, Caucasian, and
Carniolan, many of which have become popular among
beekeepers in the United States because of their specific
rearing traits.

Honey is a natural product
made by bees.
Bees have been making honey
for 150 million years, at least
since the time of the dinosaurs.

70
lbs.

The average managed hive
collects 70 pounds of pollen
during the year.

European settlers introduced the German black honey
bee (Apis mellifera mellifera) to the United States in 1638.
This specific race was well-adapted to cold temperatures.
In the 1850s, beekeepers imported the Italian honey bee
(Apis mellifera liqustica), because it produced larger colonies,
made more honey, was gentler and easier to manage.

11

Today, many apiaries typically
Honey bees evolved
include hybrids of these and
differently, and now large
other races. Although queen
numbers of sterile female
bees are sometimes artificially
worker bees act as a “super
inseminated, the vast majority
organism,” that is, an inHONEY
BEE
of queens mate while flying
dividual bee is part of the
TERMINOLOGY
with multiple males (drones),
larger social unit of the hive.
which results in diverse genetic
A mated queen handles
mixtures and genetic diversity
reproductive duties by
COLONY
in the hive. These genetic mixlaying eggs fertilized by
The colony is the biological
living unit of tens of thousands
tures are hybrids that have difsperm provided by male
of workers, drones, and a
ferent characteristics including
bees (drones) during the
queen.
disease resistance, foraging
queen’s mating flight. While
efficiency, aggressiveness,
reproductive functions are
HIVE
The
structure
in
which
bees
adaptability to fluctuating food
important, it is the female
live and are kept.
availability, honey production,
workers (as sisters and
and cold-weather tolerance.
daughters of the queen)
HONEYCOMB
Scientists have long been
who perform the majority
A sheet of hexagonal wax cells
made by honey bees to store
fascinated with honey bees.
of tasks inside and outside
honey, pollen, and brood.
The study of honey bee biology
of the hive.
goes back as far as Aristotle
Honey bees cannot
BROOD
(384-322 B.C.), making it one of
survive long on their own
Eggs, larvae, and pupae.
the oldest subjects of scientific
outside of the colony.
inquiry. And the economic
Worker bees perform
importance of honey bees
specific jobs based on
for pollination and food
their age.
production have made them
Young adult workers
the subject of work by research universities, the USDA,
perform in-hive tasks like feeding the larvae and queen,
and many beekeepers and commodity organizations
building wax combs, processing nectar into honey,
that have invested significant effort and money to
keeping the hive cleaned, and guarding the colony.
study honey bee evolution, biology, genetics, foraging
As those adult workers age, their flight muscles
behavior, communication strategies, and management.
develop to allow them to do out-of-hive tasks such
With the current suite of problems afflicting bees,
as removing dead, dying, and diseased bees away from
this research is more crucial than ever. As a result of
the colony, and, most importantly, foraging for pollen,
these concerns, we are learning more than ever about
nectar, water, and propolis. Propolis is resin from plants
how bees live and work, and the factors that affect
(including poplar trees) that honey bees use as a “bee
their populations.
glue” in the hive and as an antimicrobial medicine for
the colony.
Acting as One
The oldest bees in the colony generally perform the
Honey bees are social insects that live together in large
most energetically demanding and dangerous work
numbers. This is in contrast to solitary bees (including
of foraging for pollen, scouting for forage areas, and
sweat bees, leafcutter bees and others) and most other
finding new colony locations. Ultimately, these are a
insects. In the case of solitary bees, the female is responbee’s final jobs.
sible for building the nest, collecting food, feeding the
young, and defending the nest.

12

Each female honey bee will
assume many different roles
inside and outside of the
colony as she ages.

This division of labor among the adult workers is a
model of efficiency, like a factory assembly line in which
each worker has a defined and indispensable role. When
a forager comes back with nectar, she does not deposit
the nectar directly in a honey cell. Her priority is to get
back to foraging. Instead, she passes the nectar to a
receiver bee, who will then pass it along to others until
it is placed in a cell. If the forager cannot find a receiver
bee, she will buzz and recruit bees to become receivers.
Once the forager bee has transferred the nectar to the
receiver, she can immediately return to her duties finding
more nectar and pollen.

It Smells Like Home

Like other insects, bees sense odors (smell) with their
antennae. Every colony has its unique chemical “signature” smell that allows the guard bees to recognize that
the incoming foraging bees belong to that specific
colony, and are not foreign bees seeking to rob honey.
Within a hive, the bees’ bodies secrete a hydrocarbon
blend onto the bee’s surface. The hydrocarbon also picks
up particular floral, wax, and propolis scents that set
them apart from other bees in the area — even those
bees that may be from an adjacent colony just a few
feet away in a large apiary that contains thousands of
hive boxes.
Foraging honey bees use
sensory cues that allow them
to return to the correct hive.

13

An Information Processing Center

With a workforce consisting of more than 40,000, it
is imperative that a hive is able to clearly and rapidly
communicate the needs of the group — the same is
true even for smaller colonies of a few thousand bees.
Given that the inside of the hive is dark, the only true
way of communicating is by olfactory (smell) cues
and vibrations.
Pheromones are chemicals that bees release and
can detect with their antennae. The bees then react
to the specific messages these compounds convey.
Pheromones can communicate the presence of the
queen (queen pheromone), the queen’s health, what
and when to feed developing larvae, and when an
attacker is threatening the hive (alarm pheromone).

Returning foragers relay direction and distance information to other bees.
This worker is vibrating so rapidly while performing the waggle dance that
her body is a blur. © Scott Camazine

Dancing for Direction

Like humans, honey bees have a symbolic language —
bees use their famous “waggle dance” as a language.
These dances allow a returning forager to communicate
with its hive mates about the location (direction and
distance) of pollen and nectar. Scientists have identified
two different dance languages: the round dance and
waggle dance, for which Karl von Frisch won a Nobel
Prize in 1973.
The round dance happens when nectar and pollen
resources are close to the hive (within about 100 feet).
The forager bee will turn in circles alternating to the left
and right. While this conveys the message that flowers
are near, the round dance does not provide information
about direction.
While dancing in a circle, the forager passes off small
amounts of nectar to several different foragers. Not only
can the newly recruited foragers taste the nectar, they
also pick up the smell of the flowers from the forager’s
body. Taste and smell are valuable forms of information
that become a signature of what the foragers are searching for around the hive. Incidentally, this is the primary
reason that flowers smell the way they do — while not
all flowers are pleasing to humans, their various odors
include a range of compounds that attract a diverse
group of potential pollinators.
As the distance to the food source gets farther away
from the hive, the round dance coalesces into the waggle
dance. The waggle dance communicates information
about both the distance and direction of the flowers.

Bees transmit abstract messages to sister bees through the round dance
and waggle dance. © Scott Camazine

Inside the darkness of the hive on a vertical comb,
the returning forager who has information to convey
will dance in a pattern close to a figure eight. On the
vertical comb, the bees interpret the direction of the
sun to be always at the top of the hive. So, if the source
of the nectar is 90° to the left of the sun, the forager
performing the waggle dance will orient her head in
that direction with respect to straight up. Bees can tell
which way is up using gravity and they can follow the
dancer by feeling the wind of her buzzing wings. The
foragers, responding to this information, will leave the
hive at an angle of 90° to the left of the sun and travel
in the general direction of the food source.

14

The Bee Factory Produces
Bee Bread and Honey

If the flowers are two miles from the colony, the bee
will orient to the direction and vigorously shake and
vibrate. If the food source is one mile away, she will
shake and vibrate faster for a shorter duration than if it
is two miles away. The length of time that the forager
waggles conveys to the other workers how far away
they will have to search.
The dance does not pinpoint exactly where the plant
patch is, but it provides the general location of where
to slow down and search. Once in the general vicinity,
workers will rely on visual and olfactory cues to locate
the flowers. The overall vigor and intensity of the dance
is also a cue — it excites other bees when a forager is
more animated — and will influence the numbers of
foragers recruited.

Most organisms need a diverse diet consisting of minerals,
carbohydrates (sugars), fats, and amino acids (proteins)
to survive and reproduce. Honey bees get these essential
nutrients from flowers. Nectar (produced by the glands
of flowers to attract pollinators) is rich in sugar and
becomes the bee’s main energy source. Flower pollen
is the main source of amino acids that make up proteins
(and some fats) that provide the building blocks in the
bee’s body.
Honey bees are willing to eat fresh nectar (which has
far more water and less sugar than honey) and pollen
as it comes into the hive. However, altering nectar and
pollen gives them flexibility in storing these products for
those inevitable times when pollen and nectar become
scarce in early spring and late fall.

Bees Remember

Amazingly, a forager remembers where she has been.
She has a mental map in her brain that allows her to
return to the same place she fed the day before and
that allows her to find her home when she is done.
A honey bee’s compound eyes do not see with as
much resolution as human eyes — researchers believe
that what a bee sees is akin to a very crude pixelated
image. But that doesn’t mean visual cues are unimportant. Bees can and do see, learn, and recall a variety of
landmarks and cues, including floral smells, shapes,
patterns, and colors. They are also very good at perceiving movement. As a bee gets closer to the flower patch,
visual clues take over. Color (specifically ultraviolet (UV)
light) is another very important cue. Her eyesight is
good enough that when she is flying she can discriminate familiar but general shapes and patterns.

This honey bee is
heading out on a
foraging trip. Note
the fine hairs that
cover the bee that
make it effective at
collecting pollen.

D
EA
R
B

NECTAR

POLLEN

The three foods made
by bees, for bees,
from flowers

© Alex Wild

15

EY

Y
JELL
AL
Y
RO

BE
E

ONE CANNOT LIVE ON
BEE BREAD ALONE

HO

N

This photo shows forager and receiver bees exchanging nectar.
This food exchange is known as trophallaxis. © Alex Wild

This photo shows cells with nectar and bee bread.

Carbohydrates and Nectar

to help break down the original nectar and stabilize it
against degradation.
Nectar is 60 to 80 percent water, depending on the
plant species. Conversely, honey is less than 18 percent
water — illustrating another way bees refine nectar.
Honey’s lower water content helps preserve it. Worker
bees remove the water by fanning their wings in the
hive to evaporate as much water as possible, effectively
acting as tiny dehydrators. Bees don’t fan their wings at
each and every cell, but the passing of air throughout
the hive helps evaporate the water.
Reducing the water content also
increases honey’s sugar content, so it
provides greater energy per unit volume
than the more dilute nectar. Given that
honey is the “high-octane” fuel for
the extremely active bees, the more concentrated the product, the more
energy and bang-for-the-buck that the
bees obtain.
Removing the water from nectar is not
the only way honey bees preserve nectar. They also
add preservatives to prevent honey from spoiling. Like
humans, bees must constantly battle the ubiquitous
bacterial and fungal organisms that cause food to spoil.
Honey bees add an enzyme called glucose oxidase
(a type of oxygenase) to make honey mildly antiseptic
and sterile. Glucose oxidase works at the honey’s
surface where it combines with oxygen to turn
glucose into gluconic acid and hydrogen peroxide.

Honey is not just a repository of concentrated nectar.
It is a manufactured product that uses nectar as the
primary ingredient. The process of converting nectar
into honey begins with the foragers.
Foraging bees lap up minute amounts of nectar from
flower glands located at the base of the female portion
of the flower or from extra-floral nectaries (depending
on plant species). That foraging bee will digest some
of that nectar for its own energy needs. But most of
the nectar will remain in the bee’s honey stomach,
an organ that is adapted for transporting nectar
and bringing it back to the colony for
eventual storage. The foraging bee visits
flowers until she fills her honey stomach,
and then either continues foraging until
she has a full load of pollen or simply
returns to the hive.
While the nectar is in the honey stomach, the enzyme called invertase begins
to break the more complex sugars (such as
sucrose) into glucose and fructose, which are
easier for honey bees to digest (as well as for humans
and other animals). Upon returning to the hive, the
forager opens her mandibles and allows a receiver
bee to suck out the regurgitated nectar. The forager
usually transfers the nectar to two or more receivers
who then place a drop of nectar into a cell. The process of exchanging food like this is called trophallaxis.
During the process of transferring nectar from one
receiver bee to another, the bees add other enzymes

16

01 FROM FLOWER
TO STOMACH

Foraging bees
store nectar that
will become
honey in a
specialized
stomach. A
valve in this
honey stomach
allows some
nectar to enter
the mid-gut if
the bee needs
energy to fly.

02 INVERTASE

04 DROPPED

INTO CELLS

ADDED

03 RECEIVERS
TAKE
CONTROL

The bee adds
the enzyme
invertase to
the nectar to
break it down
into the easily
digested
sugars: fructose
and glucose.

Receiving bees
suck out nectar
from returning
bees. They
then add more
enzymes to
help break
down the
nectar.

Two or more
receiver bees
that are
loaded with
nectar place
a drop into
a cell.

05 FANNING TO

07 SEALED
IN WAX

EVAPORATE
Worker bees
fan wings
over cells to
reduce water
content in
new honey
from 60–80%
to 18% to
preserve
honey.

06 GLUCOSE
OXIDASE
ADDED
Oxygenase is
added with
the invertase
to preserve
honey.

NECTAR TO HONEY
A Sweet Job

Honey also has such a high concentration of sugar
and such low water content that it draws moisture from
any microorganism that lands in it. These features, combined with the fact that honey is acidic (with an average
pH of 3.8), makes it highly unlikely that microorganisms
can survive in this hostile environment.
Once bees fill a cell in their comb with honey, the
bees build a wax cap over it. Over time, the cap turns
darker as the air escapes. At this point, the cell is
considered sealed, and the honey inside may remain
edible and unspoiled for a very long time.

Darker cells are nearly devoid of oxygen and sealed.

17

Once filled
with honey, a
wax cap is
built over the
cell to keep
honey fresh
and available
for a long
time.

Proteins and Pollen

However, bees must still considerably manipulate
the plant structure to get enough pollen for a full
load. As the bees work the flowers and collect the
pollen on their bodies, they will brush pollen into a
pollen basket (corbicula) found on the outside of her
hind legs. Once a bee fills both baskets with pollen,
she returns to the hive.

Pollen from the anther, or male part of the flower, is
a colony’s protein source. As bees fly, they become
electrostatically-charged. As a result, when bees land
on a flower, pollen literally “jumps” off the anther and
attaches to the hairs on the bee’s body. These hairs are
also branched, which helps hold pollen. This adaptation
makes the business of collecting pollen easier.

Foragers returning to the hive with pollen. Note that the bee at the top right has a full load of pollen in the pollen baskets on her hind legs.

These photos show bees with pollen baskets at different levels of fullness (from left): empty pollen basket, partially full pollen basket, and a full pollen basket.

18

Instead of passing pollen to other bees like they do
with nectar, a foraging bee that returns to the hive with
a loaded pollen basket will deposit her load somewhere
near where young larvae are being raised. Young nurse
bees are the principal consumers of stored pollen (called
bee bread), which they feed to the larvae.
Bees also enzymatically process and age the bread.
Other bees will pack the pollen into a cell. After the pollen forager has completed her task, she may consume
some honey for energy and then return to the foraging
site to retrieve more pollen.

01 POLLEN

MOVES TO
BASKETS
Pollen is
brushed into
baskets found
on the outside
of their hind
legs.

03 PACKED
02 POLLEN

GETS
DEPOSITED
Pollen load
is deposited
near where
young larvae
are raised.

INTO
CELLS

Other
workers pack
the piles of
pollen into
a cell.

POLLEN PROCESSING
A Versatile Foodstuff

19

04 POLLEN

06 OLDER

GETS
EATEN

Honey bees
process
pollen as a
source of
protein.

05 ROYAL
JELLY

Royal jelly is
secreted from
glands in the
hypopharynx.

LARVAE:
CHEWED
POLLEN &
HONEY
Older larvae
eat a mix
of pollen
and honey
processed
together.

After a foraging bee deposits pollen, another worker compresses it with her
head to remove air spaces. The different colors indicate that the pollen is
from different flowers. © Alex Wild

Honey bees can eat pollen like they eat nectar, but
pollen’s outer coating can be difficult to break down and
digest. Young adult honey bees (nurse bees) turn pollen
into a more easily digestible product called bee bread.
Nurse bees digest bee bread in their guts, and then
glands in their head (hypopharyngeal glands) use the
digested protein to produce royal jelly or brood jelly.
Older worker larvae are fed a mixture of chewed up
pollen and diluted honey in addition to brood jelly;
however, the queen is fed royal jelly throughout her life.

A variety of fall flowers, many
of them asters, are necessary to
help bees get through the winter
with sufficient honey reserves.

Saving for a Rainy or Cold Day

Bees store honey and pollen so the colony has food
when flowers are in short supply, on rainy days when
foraging activity is limited, or through the winter when
the bees are clustered in the hive for months on end.
For an organism with a colonial life cycle and enormous
energy needs, the ability to store food resources is
essential. Without it, honey bees would periodically
run out of food and starve to death.

We all know that during the spring and fall, flowers
do not bloom on the same date each year. In fact, when
flowers bloom can vary by weeks from year to year. This
is why a hive needs thousands of foragers to take advantage of flowers when they are blooming. The next flush
of flowers and weather are both unpredictable in timing
and abundance, so gathering the products from flowers
is critical when they are available.
The fall nectar flow is particularly variable from year
to year. Honey bees depend heavily on the late-season
rush of goldenrod, asters, and other plants in the fall.
Many beekeepers usually harvest most of their honey in
August and trust that the colony will collect additional
nectar to get them through the winter. Most beekeepers
will also supplement colonies with sugar water during
this time. Still, this last flush of flowers is critical to provide the colony with enough stored honey to help them
survive the winter.

20

Drinking at the Mud Hole

A Room with Six Walls

Honey bees gather minerals and a variety of salts from
shallow and often stagnant water puddles. It sounds
counter-intuitive, but the pristine and clear waters of a
babbling brook are less appealing to honey bees. Bees
prefer brackish and mucky waters because they contain
a range of micronutrients not easily found during their
visits to plants.

Each honey bee has glands on the lower side of its abdomen that secrete a clear liquid wax. After a few minutes,
this material solidifies but remains pliable by chewing.
Working the wax in their mouths, workers build the comb
walls tilted slightly upward to keep the honey from flowing out of the cell.
Hexagonal cells are characteristic of a honey bee’s
comb. A hexagonal cell with its six walls has been shown
to be the most efficient way of using all the space available.
The six-sided cell also maximizes strength, while minimizing
the amount of wax needed for building the walls. When
a frame is completely full of honey or pollen, it can weigh
several pounds, and yet the hexagonal design doesn’t sag
or stretch.

This photo shows a partially drawn out
comb that reveals cells under construction.

Bees must expend a lot
of energy to produce wax.
It takes eight ounces of honey
combined with secretions from
the bees themselves to make
A worker bee’s wax secretions result
just a single ounce of wax.
in solidified plates. © Scott Camazine
Beekeepers reuse and
recycle all wax cells to reduce the
energy they must expend to make wax, which then allows
the bees to store more honey. This is one of the reasons
that commercial beekeepers are loathe to throw out old
frames. To maintain a clean, healthy operation, it is sometimes necessary to throw out a frame, especially if disease,
parasites, and pesticide contamination are suspected.

Stagnant water can be rich in nutrients for the honey bee.

21

Bees at the hive entrance move
air by fanning their wings. When
bees fan their wings at the hive
entrance, it helps lower the
temperature inside the hive.
© Alex Wild

An Air-conditioned Hive

Honey bees require very specific temperatures inside the
hive to protect their brood and food reserves. If the hive
temperature gets too hot (this is common in the summer),
foragers will collect water and bring the water back to
the hive in their honey stomachs.
Foragers bringing water back to the colony transfer
it to receiver bees who put small droplets into empty
cells, or close to individual brood cells, but do not touch
the larvae or eggs. Workers at the entrance will fan their
wings to create air currents inside the hive that transfers
the heat into the water, which is an evaporative cooling
process.

Guard bees defend the hive against insects such as
wasps by biting and stinging them. Against larger invaders
such as mice, honey bees rely on an accumulation of
workers to sting the animal.
An adult honey bee worker has a serrated stinger,
which is intended to lodge in its target. When a honey
bee stings, it is a one-shot proposition (unlike wasps and
many ants).
The honey
bee loses its
stinger and the
venom gland
from inside
its abdomen,
then dies
shortly
afterward.

A Call to Arms

Honey bee colonies represent an incredibly rich and uncommon food resource. Pounds of honey and thousands
of vulnerable and protein-rich larvae inside the hive
make a tempting target for any animal brave enough to
tear into it. Honey bees will aggressively defend the resources they have worked so hard to collect, process, and
store because their future depends on them. In fact, the
venom in their sting is a potent deterrent to many mammals, although it is sometimes insufficient to completely
keep them at bay.
Workers known as guard bees defend the entrance
against marauding insects and mammals that try to gain
access to the hive’s contents. Marauders can include honey bees from other colonies (robber bees), many species
of yellow jackets, as well as, mice, skunks, raccoons and
bears. Honey bees must be particularly vigilant when
foragers from other colonies attempt to rob honey
after the last fall flowers have bloomed.

Bees standing guard at a hive entrance.

Invading or sick honey bees are killed and removed from the hive.

22

Bees may have poor eyesight, but they have excellent
olfactory (odor) perception, so they can track invaders
even as they run away — if you have ever been chased
by bees, you know this first-hand. The alarm pheromone
recruits more members of the hive to come to the site
of the “battle” and offer their assistance.

The embedded stinger continues to pump venom,
appearing like a very tiny beating heart. But perhaps
more importantly, it smears the area with an alarm
pheromone that alerts other bees of immediate and
impending danger, and it marks the spot for others
to sting. That’s why one sting often leads to more in
short order. If you’ve ever been stung by a bee and taken the time to observe the spot, you will see the gland
on your skin. If you carefully scrape off the stinger and
venom gland (as opposed to crushing or swatting at it),
less venom will be pumped into the site of the sting.

Airlifting the Dead, Deformed,
Diseased, and Dying

It is common for dead, deformed, diseased, and dying
bees to be found in or near a hive by other colony
residents. A group of bees quickly identifies and drags
these bees out of the colony — sometimes close to the
entrance, but often farther away.

STING & DIE
BARBED STINGER

An undertaker bee transports a dead or dying bee away from the hive.
Undertakers often fly off with dead or diseased bees.

Workers have barbs on their
stingers. When a worker stings,
her fate is sealed immediately.
She dies when the stinger and
part of her abdomen (including
a venom gland that keeps
pumping) remain in the victim.

The bees that do this job are called undertaker (or
mortician) bees. Sometimes, undertaker bees actually
pick up their dead sisters and fly away with them. They
remove them from the hive for hygienic purposes — to
get them away from the colony where healthy bees will
not come in contact with them.
When dead bees are deposited at the entrance, they
are often consumed by ants, yellow jackets, and other
scavengers.

STING OR NOT
The drone (male bee) does not
have a stinger, so he is totally
harmless. The queen bee does
have a stinger, but it is not
barbed like the worker’s. The
queen’s stinger is slightly curved
(like a samurai sword). The
queen can repeatedly sting
without harming herself, but she
only stings when she battles
other queens. A queen will not
sting you even if you hold her in
your closed fist.

DIFFERENT VENOM

This wasp is
preparing to
take a dead bee
to its colony.

Honey bee venom is different
than yellow jacket and paper
wasp venoms. One of the
reasons why people develop
strong allergic reactions to bee
stings is because of proteins that
trigger the immune system to
respond.

23

Building and Maintaining
a City of Wax
Beekeepers learned many centuries ago that bees could
be housed in hollow logs, clay vessels, and wovendomed straw baskets (called skeps). The problem was
that removing the wax and extracting the honey meant
the container had to be destroyed, because the combs
were haphazardly positioned within these containers.
Inevitably, some combs with honey would go to waste.
So, for harvesting honey, the invention of the
Langstroth hive, which was patented in 1852, was an
important advance for beekeepers. Lorenzo Langstroth
was a Philadelphia theologian who built a wooden
honey bee hive with removable frames that was simple
to assemble, inexpensive, and relied on materials that
were portable and reusable.

Langstroth and others observed that honey bees
filled in spaces that were either smaller or larger than
the width of one bee. If the space was too small for the
bees to pass through, they would seal the space with
propolis. If the space was too large, the bees add comb
to fill the larger space.
In either case, the frames become attached to one
another, which prevented the beekeeper from readily pulling individual frames out of the hive. This optimum space became known as “bee space,” and when
Langstroth built his hive, he made sure the frames were
spaced apart by the width of one bee (3/8 inch), which
allowed the frames to remain largely unattached to
each other.

The spacing between each frame in a bee box is crucial to ensure that beekeepers can remove them easily.

24

The Langstroth hive’s many benefits include:
• Removable frames that allow beekeepers to easily
harvest honey
• Reusable frames that allow honey bees to reuse
the wax in their comb
• A scalable system that makes it easy for beekeepers
to add boxes on top to provide bees more space to
store honey
• A way for beekeepers to inspect bees without
disrupting the colony
• A simple screen (called a queen excluder) that can
be used between boxes to keep honey and brood
frames separate
• The ability to fill frames with a healthy brood as
“transplants” to start a new hive or reinforce a
weaker hive
• A way to readily transport colonies from one
location to another, which allows beekeepers
to move bees from coast to coast for commercial
pollination services
The Langstroth hive is largely unchanged from its
original design. The adoption of the Langstroth hive is
credited with creating the commercial bee industry and
making it popular for hobbyists to raise honey bees.

A wax-coated plastic foundation.

Drawing Your Home’s Blueprint
on a Foundation

Each wooden frame encloses a plastic or wax foundation. It is this vertical foundation that lets beekeepers
control where the bees build their honey combs.
Without the foundation, bees will build combs in
whatever direction that makes use of the available
space, which means beekeepers could not remove
each frame without damaging the combs. An additional advantage of using a plastic or wax foundation
is that it gives the comb structural stability and
support when filled with honey.

25

Bottom Board and Brood Box

1

The bottom board provides a landing pad and
an entrance-exit from the hive. It also provides a
platform for bees to ventilate the hive during the
hottest days of the year.
You can think of the brood box as the hive’s
nursery. It consists of one or more boxes where the
queen lays eggs and workers feed developing larvae.
Beekeepers do not harvest any honey from the
frames in the brood boxes.

Assembling the
Langstroth
Bee Box

Inner Cover

4

The inner cover is the hive’s ceiling. An elliptical hole
in the center provides ventilation. The inner cover
provides the proper bee space so bees do not glue
it to the outer cover with propolis.

26

Queen Excluder

2

Super

The metal or plastic queen excluder prevents the
queen from leaving the brood box to lay eggs in the
upper supers. The frame is wide enough for workers
to pass through, but not the queen.

Outer Cover

3

Honey supers are boxes similar to brood boxes, but
are typically shorter.
Each super holds nine to 10 frames to store
excess honey. As bees fill each super, beekeepers
add more supers. Beekeepers harvest honey from
the supers — each weighs 35 to 40 pounds when
filled with honey.

5

Smoking

The outer cover is the roof that protects
the colony from rain and snow.

Beekeepers use smoke to disarm the guards who
recruit bees to sting. The light smoke masks the
alarm pheromone, so fewer bees are recruited
to sting. It also induces the bees to engorge
themselves with honey, which makes them
more docile and less likely to sting.

27

The Biology of the Honey Bee
A healthy colony averages between 20,000 to 60,000
honey bees, but these estimates vary depending on
the availability of nectar and pollen, time of year, and
health of the colony. Within the colony, honey bees
are divided into three biologically and physiologically
distinct adult castes:

WORKER
DRONE

1. A single reproductive female known as the
queen
2. Several hundred to a thousand reproductive
males called drones
3. Thousands of sterile female workers
While there are differences between the three
castes, each passes through the same phases of
development: egg, five larval stages (each stage
is called an instar), a pupal stage, and adult. The
number of days to go from an egg to an adult
varies by caste.

QUEEN
Honey bees have distinct castes. The much longer abdomen of the queen
differentiates her from other females in the colony. Drones (males) are
characterized by larger compound eyes that meet up at the top of the head.

DAYS
WITHIN
A STAGE
BEE CASTES
EGG
LARVA
PUPA

TOTAL

WORKER

DRONE

QUEEN

3
6
12
21

3
6½
14½
24

3
5½
7½
16

days

28

days

days

Food Quality Determines Who’s Who

Over the course of six days, each larva increases in
size 1,500-fold from the first to the fifth instar stages of
development. Part of this rapid growth is due to the larvae
receiving exceptionally rich food during that time. Unlike
caterpillars and other immature insects, honey bee larvae
do not have to find (or even chew) their own food — their
food is optimized so that there is very little processing
required for them to extract nutrition from it.

Regardless of caste and sex, all larvae are fed royal jelly
for the first three days after emerging from the egg.
Royal jelly is a milky fluid rich in protein and lipids that
is produced by the hypopharyngeal gland located in
the head of young nurse bees. Nurse bees regurgitate
royal jelly into the cell with the developing larva. The
larva floats in its food as it imbibes the royal jelly. The
larva does not drown, because it has breathing holes
(spiracles) along both sides of its body and one side is
always up.
After those first three days, the type of food the larva
receives determines whether it will become a sterile
female worker or reproductive queen. Larvae fully fed
an unlimited supply of royal jelly will become queens
and have fully functional ovaries. Those destined to
develop into sterile females with underdeveloped
ovaries and drones are kept on a diet of brood jelly
and bee bread (a mixture of pollen and diluted honey).
A suite of pheromone cues within the hive determines
the amount of royal jelly that workers feed developing
larvae (that is, whether they will rear new queens or
workers).

Honey bee larvae at the bottom of cells. © Scott Camazine

A late-stage honey bee pupa extracted from its cell.
The head, thorax, and abdomen are clearly defined,
along with the legs.
This photo shows several larvae bathed in highly nutritious royal jelly
and an egg (upper center). © Alex Wild

Just before the fifth instar, a larva is ready to transform
into a pupa. The larva (called a prepupa at this point)
weaves a fine cocoon, and worker bees cap the cell with
a layer of wax. Pupae do not feed while they are undergoing the transformation (metamorphosis) from a larva
devoid of appendages to an adult worker bee with six
legs and two pairs of wings. As the adult bee emerges
(ecloses), she will clean her cell so it can be reused.

29

A Single Queen
Regardless of the colony’s size, there is generally only
one egg-producing queen in the hive at any one time.
The colony periodically rears new queens as a means to
disperse and develop new colonies and to replace aging
and failing queens. It is primarily the type of brood cell
that tells workers whether to feed the larva food that
is appropriate for a worker or royalty. Queen cells start
from wax cups that point down and the bees elongate
the cell as the queen grows to a shape that resembles
a peanut.
A productive queen lives two to four years. She is
distinguished from the workers by her large size. In
particular, a queen has an enlarged abdomen that
extends well beyond the wings and a wider thorax.
The queen starts laying eggs in late winter or early
spring. Nurse bees start eating pollen that was stored
in the fall, which is an essential ingredient for making
protein and lipid-rich royal jelly. Feeding the queen royal
jelly stimulates her to lay eggs.
When fresh pollen is available in the spring from
plants (such as maple trees) the brood rearing rate
increases greatly. This begins a spring colony buildup
during which the queen can lay 1,500 eggs per day.

Drones have large compound eyes that help them locate the
queen when mating on the wing in drone congregation areas.

Drones
There are usually 600 to 1,000 drone bees in larger
colonies. Colonies produce an abundance of drones
each spring. These male reproductive bees are rather
unique in that they hatch from an unfertilized egg laid
by the queen.
Drones have no father and their genetic makeup
comes only from the queen. When the queen mates
with many drones during a mating flight, she stores
their sperm in her spermatheca, a round organ in her
abdomen. The queen can control whether an egg that
is about to be laid is fertilized. She measures the cell
prior to laying an egg inside it. If it is a larger, dronesized cell, she does not open the valve to allow sperm
to enter the egg. The egg will then hatch into a drone
larva.
Drones are not individuals in the colony workforce.
Their sole purpose is to congregate outside the hive,
in drone congregation areas and mate with newlyemerged virgin queens from nearby colonies. Drones
use their keen eyesight to find females while in flight.
A drone is easily identified by the large eyes that cover
much of its head and meet at the top (unlike females
that have a space between their eyes).
Drones cannot sting, forage, or help in any colony
tasks. They are a drain on colony resources and are
useful only during mating, which occurs while the
weather is fair. So, when temperatures drop in the fall,
workers force the drones out of the hive where they
will die of starvation and cold.

The queen is surrounded by a group of workers (retinue) that
pick up odor cues from her and spread these info-chemicals
throughout the hive. © Scott Camazine

30

Workers
A colony’s success depends on sterile female workers
that perform virtually all of the work. While foragers
are seen gathering nectar, pollen, water, and propolis,
they only represent about 20 to 35 percent of a
colony’s total workers. The remainder of the colony
performs key tasks within the hive.
A worker bee’s lifespan varies with the time of
year. During most of the year, when the brood nest
is expanding and foragers are bringing nectar and
pollen back to the hive, a worker bee may live six
weeks. During the winter (when activity is much
slower) a worker bee can live for five or six months.
When rearing the brood, workers maintain a hive
temperature of about 93°F. Young workers clean cells,
feed the queen, remove debris, and add wax to cells.
Whether it’s feeding larvae, keeping the hive clean,
or doing the multitude of small tasks involved in
colony maintenance, these younger adult bees
reliably transition from one job to the next.
But there is also flexibility (referred to
as plasticity) in these task schedules.
For example, if an off-target
pesticide application kills a
large number of foragers,
young bees may become
precocious foragers. If all
of the nurse bees are
removed from a colony,
the hypopharyngeal
glands of older bees
will become active and
the bees will revert to
nursing duty.
WATER
Water is deposited
At about three weeks
in the hive for cooling
old, a worker bee that has
it as bees beat their
spent the entirety of her
wings.
life within the colony is
ready to take on her final
and most dangerous task:
that of a forager working
outside of the hive. New
foragers begin by performing
orientation flights in late
afternoon around the hive.

There are plenty of necessary tasks within the hive, and most of the colony
workforce is dedicated to in-colony maintenance. These nurse bees are
feeding larvae. © Scott Camazine

POLLEN
Pollen is produced by
flowers and is used as
a primary foodstuff in
a variety of forms for
bees and larvae.

FORAGER

SPECIALIZATIONS

NECTAR
Nectar is collected
from flowers to be
processed and
converted into high
energy fuel for bees.

RESIN
Resin is collected from
flowers and trees, then
mixed with beeswax to
create propolis, which has
antimicrobial properties.

31

Hundreds of these soon-to-be foragers fly close to the
hive, memorizing everything around them in a mental
map of where the hive is located. Within a few days following the onset of these orientation flights, the foragers
start scouting for pollen, water, nectar, and propolis.
For the next couple of weeks, the forager will travel
back and forth to the hive covering many miles.
Individual foragers will specialize in collecting either
pollen, nectar, propolis, or water. However, foragers can
switch duties — collecting pollen one day, then water
the next, depending on the information she receives
from the colony.
If a returning forager is inundated with receiver bees,
she not only gets unloaded quickly, she also receives
positive reinforcement that induces her to continue
foraging for whatever it was she brought in to the hive.

Additionally, she might perform a bee dance to recruit
more foragers. This is how the colony communicates
whether their provisions are in short supply, or relatively
abundant, and foragers change their foraging patterns
accordingly.
The majority of honey bees have a typical round-trip
flying distance of two to four miles, and travel at a mean
velocity of about 15 miles per hour. Bees can use the
nectar in their honey stomachs much like a gas tank.
If a nectar forager needs energy as she is travelling,
she will refuel in flight by opening a valve in the honey
stomach that releases nectar into the midgut.
Foraging is physically demanding and carries a
tremendous physiological cost for the honey bee.
After a few weeks of foraging, a honey bee forager
has worked herself to death.

HONEY BEE
NAMES BASED
ON TASKS
NURSE HOUSEKEEPER GUARD UNDERTAKER ROBBER
days

days

days

days

FANNER

RECEIVER

days

HYGIENIC

FORAGER

days

1–2

3–5

6–11

12–17

18–21

22–45

CLEANING
& LABOR

CARING
FOR BROOD

ROYAL
TASKS

CONSTRUCTION
& DISTRIBUTION

GUARDING
& COOLING

Bees polish and
clean cells. Work
inside the hive is
paramount.

Bees provide older
larvae honey and
bee bread. They
also cap the
brood.

Bees feed young
larvae and larvae
designated to be
queens royal jelly.

THE BEES
HAVE LEFT
THE HIVE

AGE IN DAYS

Bees produce wax
for building cells
and making
repairs. They also
transport food
within the hive.

In-hive house bees

Bees at this
stage guard the
entrance to the
hive and ventilate
the interior.

Out-of-hive field bees

32

Bees are now
out in the field
collecting pollen,
nectar, propolis,
and water.

This honey bee swarm
recently departed from
a hive, and are in wait
until they can find a
suitable harborage.
Swarms such as this
one (consisting of about
20,000 bees) are often
seen on branches and
other elevated vantage
points, while their scouts
look for a suitable nest
location.

One Colony Becomes Two

A healthy colony works as a team — some individuals
take care of the colony while others forage for provisions.
Depending on nectar flow and colony population size,
a colony can fill a honey box or “super” in as few as three
days. When the hive becomes full of brood, honey, and
bee bread, there is simply no space left to expand. When
space is limiting, it can induce honey bees to swarm,
effectively dividing the group in two.
The existing queen has mandibular pheromone (sometimes called the queen substance) that inhibits the construction of queen cells. As long as the queen is healthy
and laying eggs, this pheromone prevents the hive from
developing new queens. This pheromone also suppresses
ovarian development among the sterile worker females.
Workers do have a couple of ovarioles, whereas the
queen has hundreds. Most of the workers’ ovaries are
underdeveloped, so they do not produce eggs. If a worker
with developed ovaries lays an egg in a cell, her sisters will
recognize the egg is not from the queen and they will eat
it. However, if the queen dies and they are unable to raise a
new queen, some of the workers’ ovaries will develop and
the workers will lay unfertilized eggs (drones). Eventually,
this will lead to the death of the colony, since the colony
is no longer able to effectively generate worker bees.
A colony can also die if a queen uses up her supply
of viable sperm. If that happens, the queen will start
laying unfertilized eggs (referred to as a drone queen),
which produce only drones that do not forage or care
for the colony.

33

In Indiana, swarming happens mostly in May and
June. As a queen ages, she produces less mandibular
pheromone. Under crowded conditions, the mandibular
pheromone is not well distributed through the hive. With
less pheromone to inhibit queen rearing, workers are
signaled to start raising queens, and the colony division
process (swarming) begins about two weeks before the
old queen leaves. The workers put the old queen on
“a diet” to slim her down and allow her flight muscles
to develop in order to fly with the swarm.
Before swarming occurs, workers usually start five to
25 queen cells. Any fertilized egg or larva can develop
into a queen just by providing it a different quality of
food (royal jelly).
Workers closely watch the timing of when the old
queen leaves and the new queens emerge. Sometimes,
the workers hold the replacement queens as captives
inside their cells until the old queen has left with the
swarm. The workers create vibrations on the cells to
inhibit virgin queens from emerging prematurely.
The colony requires an orderly process to initiate
swarming, the old queen must leave and a substitute
virgin queen must be ready to replace her as soon as
possible thereafter. Two queens will not co-exist in one
colony; only one will inherit the colony. But sometimes,
a large colony will send another swarm, an “afterswarm,”
with a virgin queen, where a small number of bees
remain in the nest with a second virgin queen.

(Left) Queen cells are larger
than worker or drone cells
and roughly peanut-shaped.
They are also characterized
by hanging down vertically
from the comb. © Alex Wild
(Right) A queen larvae in
her cell. © Scott Camazine

The first queen to emerge usually goes to each of
the other queen cells to kill her rivals while they are still
pupating unless the workers encourage her to leave in
an afterswarm. Unlike worker bees who die if they sting,
a queen’s stinger is not serrated and queens can sting
repeatedly. If two queens emerge at the same time, they
will fight to the death. The winner-take-all approach
means the new virgin queen inherits the hive, the
brood, and all of its resources.

Just before swarming, honey bees leaving with the
queen gorge themselves with honey. When a colony
swarms, the old queen takes about half of the colony
with her. The swarm will cluster on a branch and send
out scouts to look for suitable cavities. Swarming is a
risky business, and most swarms do not survive their
first winter simply because they cannot build up sufficient colony numbers and resources to last through
the winter.

Honey bees are cavity-dwelling insects. These photographs show a feral colony
nesting in the cavity of a tree.

34

Mating on the Wing

After the mating flight, the sperm from the multiple
matings is mixed together over 48 hours inside the
queen’s spermatheca, a round organ that stores sperm
near the tip of the abdomen. The new queen’s spermatheca contains about 8 million sperm that she can use
to fertilize all of the eggs that she will lay over the
remainder of her life.
Beekeepers have developed methods to artificially
raise queens to replace lost queens, so that managed
colonies remain “queen right” because virgin queens
can be killed on mating flights. In addition, artificially
inseminating queens provides beekeepers with the
ability to control colony genetics.
The queen lays her first eggs in the brood chamber
close to the center of the comb. She will deposit a single
egg in each cell. Each egg looks like a tiny grain of rice
and has an opening on the side to allow sperm to penetrate. Eggs that are fertilized with sperm become either
queens or sterile female workers, while unfertilized eggs
become drones.
A queen that runs out of sperm is either very old or
did not mate with sufficient males. If this occurs, she will
lay only drones and must be replaced, either by her nest
mates or by a human caretaker. If an infertile queen
persists, she will continue to produce drones and the
colony will die, because she can produce no new workers
to sustain the colony.

At most, a queen only leaves the hive twice. One is when
she swarms as the established queen; however, this
may not happen during her lifetime. All queens depart
from the hive to mate. After about seven days living in
the hive, the new unmated queen makes an orientation
flight to familiarize herself with the hive’s location. Soon
after, the virgin queen leaves the hive on an afternoon to
find the drones.

A rare photograph of a queen and drone mating on the wing. © Eric Tourneret

Drones usually take mating flights in the afternoon.
Drones fly to specific congregation areas where multiple
males wait for virgin queens to appear. The drones will
fly for about 45 minutes before returning to the hive to
refuel with honey. Drones may repeat this process multiple times during the day. The vast majority of drones
never mate.
On her mating flight, a queen flies toward a drone
congregation area. Once there, the queen’s pheromone
attracts the attention of the males. She will mate about
60 to 100 feet off the ground with 12 to 18 drones. Each
male will grasp onto the queen and evert their aedeagus
(penis) to mate with the queen in flight. The drone will
die soon after mating is complete. The queen returns
to the colony, which she will not leave again unless it
is time for her to swarm.

Larvae and eggs can often be found in the same comb. © Scott Camazine

35

Healthy colonies are typically able
to survive North American winters.

The Winter Cluster

Honey bees do not hibernate. Because they are small,
a bee’s internal temperature will rapidly take on the
outside temperature, which can be lethal during a North
American winter. However, Western or European honey
bees have adapted a survival strategy of clustering
together in a mass to generate and conserve heat.
In late fall, a bee colony contains about half the number
of adult workers it had in the summer, but there is no
brood to care for, and foraging is complete for the year.
The colony’s goal heading into winter is to maintain
sufficient temperatures to keep the colony alive. Bees
accomplish this by forming a tight ball (cluster), which
is interrupted by wax combs that provide insulation.
On the outside of the cluster are a mantle of bees
that connect their legs together and essentially form a
shell. These bees serve as a heat shield to help retain the
heat within the cluster. In the interior, workers perform
“isometric exercises,” while remaining virtually motionless and vibrate their thoracic muscles. Shivering their
muscles generates heat.
Individual bees take turns heating themselves to
almost 100°F. Other bees will fan their wings to disperse
excess heat, and regulate the amount of carbon dioxide
in the cluster. The individual bees take turns heating
themselves up, fanning, and serving as mantle bees,
rotating in and out of the ball with the queen safely
in its center.

Winter can be the final stressor that finishes off unhealthy bees and weak hives. It is typical for 15 to 28
percent of all hives to not survive the winter. There are
two factors that allow bees to endure frigid winter
temperatures:
1. Enough stored honey that the bees can eat
2. An adequate number of bees to cluster and keep
the overwintering colony warm
If the colony is insufficiently strong going into winter,
or it does not have enough provisions to last through
the winter, its chances of survival are greatly reduced.
Second to Varroa mites, winter starvation is believed
to be the most common cause for colony mortality.

Note the dead bees in this comb and the empty honey cells. Most of the bees
on this comb died while searching for food. © Alex Wild

36

HEAT GENERATOR
Worker bees do isometric
exercises to their thoracic
muscles raising their
temperature to almost
92° F when incubating
brood in the nest.

A WARM HEART
OF THE HIVE

THE FAN
Other bees fan their
wings to disperse
excess heat to keep
the temperature
regulated.

HOT IN THE CORE
A tight ball of worker
bees form in the core to
generate heat to keep
the queen at 70°–80° F.
Honey, also in the core is
the high octane fuel for
the bees.

HEAT SHIELD
Bees form a mantle by
linking their legs and
function as a heat shield
to keep warmth inside.

They do not heat the whole hive, but focus on keeping
the core of the cluster (where the queen is) at 70-80°F.
When the bees begin rearing brood again in late winter,
they will need to increase the temperature of the hive
to 93°F. Generating all that heat requires more honey
to fuel the energy the bees are expending. So, stored
honey is located nearby the cluster. The cluster will stay
in one area until they have depleted the honey reserves.
Without food, the bees are forced to move to a new area
of the comb that contains honey.
Honey bees that experience extended periods of
cold can still face serious problems. If -10°F temperatures
persist for weeks on end, bees can become chilled to
the point that they are unable to move to the comb
to where honey is stored. Prolonged cold can kill the
cluster, and bees starve to death when they are unable
to access honey.

These photos show a cluster of honey bees in late February. Within
minutes, the bees on the lid (on the left side of the bottom photo) were
dead, because there were not enough bees to keep them from freezing.

37

Death Is a Way of Life
Colony strength and hive health are linked to having
a large population of multi-aged workers, working inside
and outside the hive. A thriving colony of 40,000 bees
will lose hundreds of foraging bees each day. Foragers
represent about 20 percent of the total number of bees
in a colony, but each day, 10 percent of these foragers
will die from old age, predators, and weather events. This
means that the colony needs to replace approximately
800 foragers daily.

Now that we know more about how a honey bee colony
lives and operates, we can begin to examine the factors
that can cause a colony to die prematurely.
A colony’s survival is based on overcoming constant
losses from biological, environmental, and chemical
stresses. From the colony perspective, a forager that
dies from pesticide exposure or Varroa mites would be
no different than one of many possible natural causes
of death.
There are feedbacks within the hive that ensure bees
are replaced. However, there are limits to the colony’s
ability to bounce back. Continuous large losses can be
detrimental to the hive’s health and survival. For social
insects like honey bees, death is accounted for by having
the queen lay 1,000 or more eggs each day as part of the
biological cycle.

Although their
sting is a potent
deterrent, many
predators —
including spiders
(top right) and
mantises (left) —
are able to catch
and eat honey
bees. The carpenter
ants in the bottom
right photo are
dismembering
dead honey bees.

© Scott Camazine

© Scott Camazine

38

Honey bee research
is one of the largest
subdisciplines in
entomology. Research
is underway to respond
to contemporary honey
bee challenges. Here,
scientists inspect hives.

Bees can react to their environment in many ways
depending on season, temperature, and food supply.
Bees can produce less brood when the hive is crowded,
and the queen lays fewer eggs when food and other resources are reduced or unavailable. By the same token,
the queen can increase egg production when necessary.
Of course, there are times when a colony’s recuperative
abilities are insufficient to maintain its population.
Every honey bee colony has a tipping point — a point
when the population gets so low that recovery is difficult, if not impossible. In those cases, it is only a matter
of time before the colony fails. A dying colony is not
always due to factors from outside the hive. A colony
can struggle when an older queen is laying fewer eggs,
or she runs out of stored sperm and begins laying infertile eggs.
This is one of the main reasons why workers will rear
a new queen to kill and replace the older, failing queen.
If the queen is failing and not replaced in time, the colony
may be “short-staffed” in terms of both foragers and
guard bees. Without enough guard bees protecting the
hive entrance, invading hive beetles, bees, wasps, and
even mammals can more easily gain entry into the hive
and wipe out the food supply and brood.
Additionally, Varroa mite infestations and diseases
have been shown to reduce the life span of adult bees
by as much as 50 percent. Given that colonies do not
lay down brood in the winter and that winter bees must

sustain colony temperature until the spring, short-lived
winter bees may result in a smaller cluster size that endangers colony survival.
As with any loss of honey bees, when a pesticide or
extreme cold kills a large number of foragers, the colony
must compensate for this loss. How honey bees respond
to these population losses depends on what kind of
condition the colony is in and the extent of the loss
(both in terms of numbers of bees affected and the
duration of the stress).
Combinations of stressors may weaken a colony
below its tipping point (that is, below the numbers
of bees needed to sustain a colony). For example,
outbreaks of individual stressors (such as Varroa mites,
disease, or low food reserves) can combine to weaken
a colony and make it more susceptible to cold. It is important to remember that honey bees never encounter
stresses in isolation — they are always subject to a variety of environmental stresses, both inside and outside
the hive.
Some of these stressors (such as abnormally cold
temperatures, wind blowing pesticide drift onto flowering plants, etc.) are beyond a beekeeper’s control.
Although you can blame a colony death on one particular factor, it may be the timing of the event that is key —
the colony may have already been weakened and that
single factor could have been the proverbial last straw
that pushed the colony beyond the tipping point.

39

The Four P’s that Affect Bees
colony-level effects of pesticides can vary greatly based
on when the bees were exposed.
For example, in the spring and early summer, a colony
is growing because nectar and pollen are abundant.
So, at these times, losses from a pesticide application
may not be as significant or as noticeable if the same
number of deaths occur in late summer and early fall
when the hive is in natural decline and the colony
requires a minimum level of bees (cluster size) to keep
the colony warm during the coming winter.

When it comes to the factors that affect honey bees,
we can look at the four P’s:
1. Pathogens
2. Pests
3. Poor nutrition
4. Pesticides
Although multiple factors (either singularly or in
combination) can threaten a colony’s ability to survive,
it is the fourth P (pesticides) that can be particularly
challenging for bee colonies when bees forage in
treated agricultural or nonagricultural sites. The

THREE STRESSORS TO A HIVE
R AI N

WIN
D

OW
SN

DR
OU

FU N G U S

S
RA
PA

S
ITE

NT
AL

CA

L

AL
MI

CH E

GIC

HIVES UNDER ATTACK

The colony is faced with many
potential threats to its
livelihood. Mitigating these
threats is a constant struggle.

40

FIRE

01 0203

IA

B I O LO

ME

S

A
IR

TER
BAC

ON

IN

NTS
PLA
IN

E NVI R

ON

U
S

OR
AT
ED

IN WATER

PR

VI
R

GH
T

H
NEC

THROUGH

BY A I R

TAR

A
RISKY
TRIP
A
BY W TER

There are many
potential routes
of exposure to
pesticide residues
on a typical
foraging trip.

TOPSOIL
BY

P

G

O

THR
OU

EN
LL

However, there can be serious short-term repercussions of turning nurse bees into foragers, such as
having fewer workers available to rear brood, control
temperatures, and clean the hive. Precocious foragers
may be more susceptible to predation, because they
have not had sufficient time to learn how to forage effectively, or their body physiology is not yet developed
to meet the rigors that come with constant foraging.
Precocious workers often have shorter lifespans and,
at least initially, tend to be less efficient foragers.
As we will explore in the sections that follow,
pesticide exposure is not always easy to characterize.
Pinpointing a cause can be a real challenge.

A colony will employ safeguards to stay viable,
even after many bees have been killed. If an event
kills too many foragers, the colony will have nurse
bees accelerate their behavioral development and
become precocious foragers. On the other hand, if
pesticide residues were brought to the hive in the
pollen or nectar and kills nurse bees, then some of
the foragers can revert back to working inside the
hive. These are biological responses that help the
colony buffer itself against higher than normal losses
(that is, compensate for or recover from such losses).

41

Routes of Pesticide Exposure
from Field to Hive
The public, scientific community, and regulatory agencies
have increasingly focused on the effects that pesticides
have on honey bees and (to a much larger extent) the
pollinator community as a whole. There are legitimate
concerns for honey bees, because some insecticides will
kill bees at very low concentrations.
Just like targeted insects, nontarget insects such as
honey bees can encounter pesticide residues directly by
coming into contact with spray droplets or dust particles
during application. Bees can be exposed while landing
and foraging on treated surfaces such as leaves and
flowers (contact exposure). They can also be exposed

to pesticides by ingesting contaminated pollen and nectar
from treated plants or by ingesting water that has been
contaminated with a pesticide (oral exposure).
Also, plants can take up certain systemic pesticides
through their roots or leaves. The plant then distributes
these systemic pesticides to other parts of the plant, such
as pollen and nectar, which the bee can then ingest.
Whether exposed to pesticides by contact or ingestion,
forager bees can move pesticide residues into the colony.
The foragers serve as an unwitting route of exposure for
in-hive bees (including nurse bees, the brood, and the queen)
when foragers drop off a load of tainted pollen or nectar.

This photo shows hundreds of poisoned bees outside of a hive. To be certain that the bee die-off was caused by a pesticide often requires collecting freshly killed
or dying bees and promptly freezing them for chemical analysis.

42

It is important to remember that pesticides are not
just used on agricultural crops or in residential settings.
The beekeeping community also uses pesticides to control pests such as Varroa mites, small hive beetles, and
wax moths. Beekeepers apply some of these compounds
directly to the interior of the colony to control pests,
such as the Varroa mite.
The importance of each exposure route depends on
several factors:
• How the pesticide was applied
• The pesticide’s properties — How long can it
persist on flowers and in water? Is it mobile in
plants? Is it volatile?
• How close the hive is to the treated area
• How susceptible the bees are to the pesticide
(toxicity)

A forager can bring pesticide residues back to the hive in pollen, in water,
in nectar, or on her body. © Alex Wild

Within a two- to three-mile radius around the hive,
and depending on the toxicity of the pesticide to the
bees, direct contact with the chemical during application
or contact with recently treated foliage can directly kill
foragers visiting blooming crops or ornamentals in a
garden. While large bee kills are uncommon, a bee kill
from pesticides can devastate a colony.
Investigators often link bee deaths to insecticides
applied directly to blooming landscape trees, fruit trees,
and crops. Depending on the extent of exposure and the
pesticide’s toxicity, bee kills can result in the outright loss
of a colony or cause such significant losses to a specific
caste (such as forager bees or the brood) that it considerably weakens the colony.
When pesticides are applied during bloom, residues
can remain on flowers, pollen, and nectar, and be transferred to the bee through contact exposure. The amount
of potential residues depends on the environmental conditions and pesticide’s characteristics.
Bees in flight can also be exposed to pesticide drift of
dusts or liquid droplets in the air — the pesticide is often
carried off-target by the wind. Experience with residue
studies of different pesticides in pollen and nectar of
multiple crops and ornamental plants show that this will
depend on pesticide properties, application timing and
crop/plant features. If an applicator applies pesticides
during the evening when bees are inactive, some pesticides can dry before bee activity resumes the next day.
The flowers of certain crops and plants are neither attractive to honey bees or they remain closed during application, which leads to low residues in pollen and nectar.

Workers feed and
groom the queen.
© Alex Wild

Foraging bees can bring pesticide residues into the
hive and transfer them to receiver bees and other foragers through a process known as trophallaxis. When the
returning forager bee regurgitates the contents of its
honey stomach to its nest mates, the receiver bees place
the contaminated nectar in cells to make honey. Later,
adult bees will consume the honey that contains pesticide residues.
A similar exposure can occur with pollen. Nurse bees
consume more stored pollen (bee bread) than any of the
adult castes in the hive. They use bee bread to produce
royal jelly and brood jelly, which in turn is fed to the developing larvae and the queen. If the bee bread contains
pesticide residue, then the pesticide may be expressed
in the secreted jelly. Because of the way bees share and
store food throughout the colony, the entire colony
could be exposed to pesticide residues from a single
exposure event.

43

HOW PESTICIDE EXPOSURE SPREADS

01

FORAGERS
Foragers return with contaminants
on their bodies and on the foraged
goods they bring home.

02

RECEIVERS
These bees take contaminated
product from foragers and bring it
into the hive and put it into cells.
They become affected.

03

HONEYCOMB
Comb wax can be affected as
contaminated bees come into
contact with walls.

04

NURSES
HONEY

Nurses take soiled pollen and nectar
and make food products with them.
They become affected.

POLLEN

05

FOODS
Contaminated nectar and pollen can
lead to pesticide residue in foods fed
to developing bees.
ROYAL JELLY

BEE BREAD

PROCESSED POLLEN

LIFE STAGES
Larvae, pupa and young bees
are fed contaminated foods. They
are affected and develop that way.

06

LARVA

PUPA

WORKER

ADULT ROLES
Having been fed affected food
during their development, young
bees grow into adult roles—now
affected.

07

NURSE HOUSEKEEPER GUARD

FANNER

RECEIVER

HYGIENIC

QUEEN & DRONE
The queen and drones are fed
affected foods and come into
contact with affected bees.

08
FIELD BEES
DRONE

New external bees are ready to leave
hive. They are already affected.

QUEEN

CYCLE BEGINS AGAIN

09

FORAGER

ROBBER

UNDERTAKER

44

Everything is Poisonous at Some Dose

The 16th century philosopher and pioneer of toxicology,
Paracelsus, is credited with coining the phrase “The dose
makes the poison.” This phrase remains one of the guiding
tenets of toxicology.
But it’s worth quoting Paracelsus more accurately here:
“[A]ll things are poison and nothing is without poison; only
the dose makes a thing not a poison.”
This full statement recognizes that all organic, inorganic,
natural, or synthetic chemicals (even water) are capable
of being toxic at some dose. A toxic dose differs from one
chemical to the next because of how the chemical is applied, its mode of action, and whether the chemical can be
metabolized and/or excreted.
When it comes to pesticides, there is always an exposure
level that will not measurably affect bees. But as pesticide
exposure increases, bees will begin showing sublethal effects — not unlike a person affected by a drug or disease.
These effects are often expressed as impaired behavior —
their activity level may greatly increase or decrease, or they
may feed notably less. Increasing the exposure level can
lead to death, which is what beekeepers and other observers most often notice.
A comparison to medicines can explain the concept that
the dose makes the poison. If you take the recommended (therapeutic) dose of a medicine like aspirin, it should
relieve your pain or fever. But exceeding the therapeutic
dose can lead to adverse reactions and even death. A dose
that is too low will have no curative effect, but a dose that
is too high may kill.
Scientists studying bee biology have shown that there
are many ways individual bees and the colony can be exposed to pesticide residues. As long as pesticides are used
outdoors and in areas where bees are foraging, bees will
come in contact with pesticide residues.
So, a more relevant question is: At what concentration
(dose) will a pesticide exposure in the environment harm
an individual bee or the colony?
One of the difficulties in determining the risk to bees
from pesticide exposure is that bees forage widely in the
landscape, and pesticide exposure can come from many
sources. In addition, honey bees are social animals and the
survival, growth, and reproductive success of the species is
measured at the colony level, rather than at the individual
bee level.
In other words, it can be difficult to determine the precise
dose that a foraging bee or its colony will be exposed to.
Determining colony-level effects is complicated by a
number of factors including:

45

• When the pesticide was encountered and how
often it was encountered — was this a one-time
acute exposure or a long-term chronic exposure?
• Whether the pesticide exposure was limited to
contacting foragers in the field
• Whether the exposure was dietary — that is, did
bees consume the pesticide in the pollen, nectar,
or water brought back and stored in the hive?
These are the challenges that risk assessors face when
they must determine the potential risk of pesticides to
honey bees and other pollinators.
In general, researchers determine how sensitive bees
are to a pesticide through laboratory tests and in some
cases, in field studies. The challenge is to determine
whether a specific pesticide’s active ingredient:
• Adversely affects the various castes and age
classes of honey bees
• Risk to individual bees poses a challenge for
the inner workings of the colony
• Presents an unreasonable risk compared to its
potential benefits
So, when answering the question, “Will applying this pesticide present a risk to honey bees?” we first need to define risk.
Risk is defined as the magnitude and likelihood of an adverse effect. It is important to remember that risk is a function of exposure and toxicity. You may know a particular
compound’s toxicity, but if you don’t know the environmental exposure estimates, or you have exposure estimates but
don’t know the toxicity, you only have part of the equation
and can’t adequately determine risk.
Scientists study the biological response of honey bees
by exposing the bees to varying doses of a pesticide (under
laboratory or field conditions).
If the pesticide level in the environment is less than what
is known from laboratory acute and chronic studies to
cause no harm, then the presumption is that the pesticide
will pose minimum risks to honey bees for the life stage
tested (such as adult bees or larvae).
If the pesticide level in the environment is higher than
those shown to produce acute or chronic effects in adult and/
or larval bees, then the presumption is the product poses risk.
As we can guess from our understanding of bee biology,
evaluating risks to honey bees presents a challenge. The
hive is a colony of individuals that essentially acts as one
individual. That means risk assessors must assess the risk
that a pesticide poses to individual bees at different levels
of organization (individual bee larvae, adult workers,
queens, drones) plus the colony as a whole.

The EPA Risk Assessment Process
The Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act (FIFRA) — one of many laws authorizing the EPA to
regulate pesticides — defines a “pesticide” as “any substance or mixture of substances intended for preventing,
destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pests; any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as
a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant; and, any
nitrogen stabilizer.”

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is tasked
with (among other things) licensing the sale, distribution,
and use of pesticides.
Pesticide is an inclusive term that describes the thousands of EPA-registered products used to manage insects,
weeds, plant diseases, and others pests. Beyond that simple definition, this term has regulatory implications: The
EPA must evaluate whether each active ingredient passes
current health, safety, and environmental guidelines.

THE EPA AS A GATEKEEPER

1 2
ANALYZE DATA

TEST PRODUCT

Manufacturers give data
to the EPA who analyze it
and verify it is accurate.

A

R

C

E

M

N

Laboratory and field
studies are conducted to
determine product safety.

U FA T U R
C

DETERMINE USE

REEVALUATE
PESTICIDES

Label is finalized based
on intended use and
safety, and product
is licensed for sale.

Pesticides are
evaluated on a
15 year schedule.

4 3
46

US

TO ME

R

For many, “pesticide” is a word with negative connotations, yet pesticides are no more inherently dangerous
than medicines. If used properly, medicines can manage
human ailments. The risk posed by medicines varies
considerably, and depends upon the specific drug, its
chemical composition, the dose taken, and the age of the
person taking the medication. The same principles hold
true for pesticides.

The EPA Office of Pesticide Programs (OPP) is authorized to determine whether a pesticide can be used in a
manner that will not pose an unreasonable risk to human
health or the environment. When a company submits a
new pesticide to the EPA for review, the company (called
the applicant at this stage) includes a proposed label.
Once a chemical is registered, the company that owns
the label is referred to as the registrant.
The EPA uses the company’s proposed label as a foundation for a formal risk assessment. Thus, it is the label
that the EPA approves and registers as part of the licensing process based on a broad range of environmental
fate, human health effects, and ecological effects data.
Honey bees and pollinators play an important role in
the environment. That’s why the EPA convened a scientific advisory panel in 2012 to examine the procedures for
assessing pesticide risk to bees. The panel was composed
of recognized experts in the fields of toxicology, Apis and
non-Apis bee biology, statistics, and risk assessment. The
EPA also consulted various agencies, including Health
Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency and the
California Department of Pesticide Regulation. The panel
agreed that additional testing was warranted to determine
the potential effects pesticides could have on non-Apis
bees. They also agreed with specific protection goals
(see Specific EPA Protection Goals).

Healthy larvae (like these) are the goal of every beekeeper. One of the EPA’s
goals is to make sure that pesticides do not pose too great a risk to colony
survival. © Alex Wild

SPECIFIC EPA PROTECTION GOALS
EXAMPLE MEASUREMENT ENDPOINTS
PROTECTION
GOAL

ASSESSMENT
ENDPOINTS

POPULATION LEVEL
AND HIGHER

INDIVIDUAL
LEVEL
Individual worker and
larval survival assays;
larval emergence;
queen fecundity/
reproduction

Contribution to
bee biodiversity

Species richness
and abundance

Individual bee survival
(solitary bees) and
colony strength and
survival (social bees)
Species richness
and abundance

Provision of
pollination services

Population size 2 and
stability of native bees
and commercially
managed bees

Colony strength and
survival; colony
development

Individual worker and
larval survival assays;
queen fecundity;
brood success;
worker bee longevity

Production of
hive products

Quality and quantity
of hive products

Quantity and quality
of hive products;
including pesticide
residue levels on
honey and wax

Individual worker and
larval survival assays;
queen fecundity/
reproduction;
larval emergence

47

All of these species differ in their biological and life
cycle traits, including body size and sociality. Honey bees
and non-Apis bees may also differ in other traits such as
flight season, number of generations, floral specialization,
or nesting behavior. All these traits may provide different
exposure routes or exposure levels among the species.
One answer to the question is that when assessing a
pesticide, a researcher can extrapolate test results from
individual female worker social bees to female solitary
bees. Although the solitary bees do not form colonies,
they do perform a variety of functions such as laying
eggs, foraging, and caring for offspring. The results of
testing the effects of a pesticide on the colony is thought
to be equivalent to measuring the impact on social bees;
however, some social bees (such as Eastern bumble bee,
Bombus impatiens), may overwinter as a single organism
as opposed to a colony.
A second frequently asked question is: Don’t all species
of animals and plants have a different potential response
to a pesticide?
On a biochemical level, species are more similar physiologically than they are dissimilar. Most species share
similar physiological processes, signaling molecules, and
chemical pathways that provide the rationale for why the
toxic effects in a surrogate species are likely to be similar
to other animal and plant species.
For instance, a pesticide that has a mode of action that
affects a honey bee’s nervous system would be expected
to have a similar mode of action and overt effects on other insects, including pollinators. Researchers can extrapolate effects to other species by understanding how much
the indicator species shares physiological processes with
other species in its group of species (called a taxon), and
to some extent across taxa.
While surrogate species work well in estimating risks,
there is always the possibility that differences exist between species. This is why the EPA uses other lines of
evidence — such as the scientific literature and incident
reports (bee kills) — to determine whether there are differences. Plus, in order to address concerns about the
honey bees serving as the sole surrogate for a host of
beneficial insects, regulatory authorities collaborate with
researchers to expand toxicity tests to include non-Apis
species. However, the same uncertainty about interspecies variability will apply to these other species if (or
when) researchers can develop suitable testing protocols.
Let’s examine how the EPA currently assesses the risk
pesticides can pose to bees and other pollinators.

The panel reviewed the procedures for how the EPA
assesses pesticide risk to honey bees and other pollinators. They also suggested how to revise and add procedures to better protect these important species. In short,
the EPA is always investigating ways it can refine and
improve the process of assessing pesticide risk to bees.

The Honey Bee as a Surrogate for Insect
Pollinators

Even so, assessing a pesticide’s risk to insect pollinators
can be complicated. It’s important to understand that
the EPA doesn’t require a registrant to test the effects
of their pesticide on every possible insect species. It is
logistically impossible to test all species that may be
exposed to a given pesticide in the environment. Some
species remain unknown to science and some are endangered. Researchers do not fully know the vast majority of
nonmammal species, so it isn’t possible to routinely test
all these species under laboratory conditions.
That’s why it is common to extrapolate toxicity studies conducted on one organism (called a surrogate or
substitute) to a broader number of related organisms.
Surrogate species testing is a foundation of toxicology.
Using a single species to extrapolate the effects of
pesticides on others continues to be controversial. In
the case of pollinators, one frequently asked question is:
How can a single species like the honey bee be a reasonable surrogate for the thousands of solitary and social
non-Apis bees?

48

A Host of Questions to Answer

• Is the pesticide water-soluble, volatile, or subject
to atmospheric transport?
• Is the pesticide mobile or immobile in water
and soil?
• At what rate does the pesticide break down in
the environment?
• If the pesticide breaks down, are its by-products
similar enough to the parent compound to cause
concern? In other words, are the by-products toxic?
• At what concentrations do the laboratory studies
indicate adverse effects following a single (acute)
versus repeat (chronic) exposure?
• Are there data to assess the relative sensitivity
of other non-Apis bees?

As part of the federal review and product registration
process, the EPA bases its decisions to accept or deny
a product registration based on:
• Legal mandates contained in FIFRA
• Scientific data from active ingredient-specific
and product-specific tests
• Public policies that determine the acceptable
risks to human health and the environment
As we’ve mentioned, honey bees are used as a
surrogate to assess risks to other pollinators. Therefore,
the EPA’s product registration decisions are intended
to protect other insects, including social non-Apis bees
like bumble bees (Bombus spp.), solitary bees like blue
orchard bee (Osmia lignaria), and other pollinators like
alfalfa leaf cutter bees (Megachile rotundata). As with
other taxa, the EPA uses the best available information
to assess the potential risks to other pollinator insects
(such as butterflies).
When evaluating the potential direct risks to bees
on a treated crop, regulators ask these questions:

All of these questions revolve around knowing
more about the pesticide, its proposed/existing uses,
environmental exposures, toxicity, and derived benefits. Because these are serious questions that require
the EPA’s diligence, the pesticide review process (for
new products or modifications to existing products) is
lengthy, comprehensive, time-consuming, and costly
both to the EPA and registrants.
Registrants require nearly 11 years of research and
$290 million to get a pesticide product with a new active
ingredient developed, screened, reviewed, and registered. With the worldwide market valued at more than
$50 billion, companies are willing to invest large sums
of money to research their products.

• What crops will the pesticide be applied to?
• Are any of the target crops attractive to
foraging bees?
• Is the pesticide applied during bloom?
• What are anticipated exposure routes?
For example, will bees be exposed by contact?
By ingesting residues in nectar and pollen?

49

IN

Do

USA
GE
IR
E NV

TA
L

FATE

The EPA uses the information it receives from each
registrant to understand how they intend the product to
be used. This information includes application sites (such
as crops), maximum single application rates (such as
pounds of active ingredient per acre), maximum number
of applications, reapplication intervals, maximum seasonal/yearly application rates, application methods, and
intended target pests. As noted earlier, this information

re
he s
et
e
Ar ntag t
uc
va
a d p r o d vs .
s
s
thi vide ers?
p ro ot h

W
h
t h e at is
e n ra te
vir
o
br
ea onm f
kd
e
ow n t a
n? l

EN

Are any
breakdown
components
residues of
concern?

M

N

e
id
tic in r ?
s
p e i l e te
I s o b wa
m r&
ai

O

e
sticid
ile,
Is pe le, volat
b
lu
t to
so
c
je
b
or su spheric
o
at m p o r t?
s
t ra n

ON
ATI
M
R
FO

e
er
t h ties
e
e
Ar tain uir l
a
r
q
ce t re tion a?
n
t
i
u ha d
a
d
t ad

ITI
SENS VITY

Wha
t c ro
will
ps
th
pest e
icide
app
b
e
lied
to?

What are the
anticipated
exposure
routes?

ide
tic
es
I s p lie d
p
a
a p ri n g
du om?
blo

Is
at cr
to t r a o p
b e fo c ti
es rag ve
?
in
g

co
n
stu centr
die ati
a
on
d
s
ad
ve ve r s e s h o w
rse
o
r
ef f
n
ec o
ts?

INFORMATION NEEDED TO
DETERMINE RISKS TO HONEY BEES

a ny
A re t s
f fec
e
b
la
ent in
p re s
ield?
the f

Does
s u p p d at a
or t
sensit the
of no ivit y
n -apis
bees?

Ca
n
m la
ex i t i g b e l
co p o a s
n c s u te
e r re
ns
?

is a foundation for the risk assessment.
Based on a chemical’s intended use and whether it
is a new or currently registered pesticide, the EPA will
develop a risk hypothesis based on the most reliable
science available. In some cases, these risk hypotheses
are relatively generic and presume risks across a broad
range of taxa. The EPA uses data submitted by the
registrant to test the risk hypothesis.

50

FRAMEWORK FOR ECOLOGICAL RISK ASSESSMENT

INTEGRATE AVAILABLE INFORMATION

Management
Goals

PROBLEM
FORMULATION

PLANNING
(Risk Assessor/
Risk Manager
Dialog)

Source & Exposure
Characteristics

Ecosystem
Potentially at Risk

Assessment
Endpoints

Conceptual
Model
Analysis
Plan

CHARACTERIZATION OF
EXPOSURE

ANALYSIS

Management
Options

Resources

Scheduling

Measures
of Exposure

CHARACTERIZATION OF
ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS

Measures of Ecosystem
& Receptor Characteristics

Ecological Response Analysis

Exposure
Profile

Stressor-Response
Profile

This illustration shows the flowchart
process the EPA follows to assess
ecological risks.

Acquire
Data

Measures
of Effect

Exposure Analysis

Iterate
Process

Monitor
Results

RISK
CHARACTERIZATION

Scope,
Complexity
& Focus

Ecological
Effects

AS
NECESSARY

Risk
Estimation

Risk
Description

Communicating Results
to the Risk Manager

Risk
Management

The bottom line is that FIFRA requires the EPA to
answer the question: Does this product present an
unreasonable risk to the environment when it is used
under the conditions proposed for its use or that are
currently in use?
To answer this question, the EPA needs to understand
a product’s exposure and toxicity, and then needs to

determine whether exposure is likely to harm each species.
They will weigh the likelihood and magnitude of adverse
ecological effects (that is, risk) against potential benefits.
During this process, the EPA also articulates a conceptual
model of potential routes of exposure and effects. The
EPA also identifies the overall plan for conducting the risk
assessment.

51

Determining Many Routes of Exposure

• The pathways a systemic pesticide can be
distributed within a plant
• How residues can then be transported to various
matrices within the plant (such as pollen/nectar)
• And subsequently, how residues can be transported
within the colony (through wax, royal and brood
jelly) and expose the bees

A key component of the risk assessment process is to
identify a pesticide’s potential routes of exposure based
on the product’s expected use. To evaluate the potential
risks to bees, this is a rather complicated process, because investigators must delineate the number of ways
that an individual honey bee and the colony can come
into contact with the pesticide.
The figure on this page is an example of the various
routes by which nontarget species can be exposed to
pesticides. The information for the figure was taken from
a recent assessment of a foliar-applied neonicotinoid
systemic insecticide. The conceptual diagram depicted
in the figure provides an example of:

The routes of exposure may be much simpler with
nonsystemic pesticides. For any pesticide, exposure can
result from direct application to the various environmental matrices (directly to bees, plants, soil, and water).
However, the plant does not translocate nonsystemic
pesticide residues into pollen and nectar.

POTENTIAL ROUTES OF EXPOSURE TO NONTARGET SPECIES

IMIDACLOPRID: FOLIAR SPRAY APPLICATION
STRESSOR

SOURCE

Spray Deposition
on Bees

Deposition on
Plants

Deposition onto
Soil

Deposition onto
Surface Water

RUNOFF/EROSION
FOLIAR TRANSLOCATION

EXPOSURE
MEDIA

Residues on
Plant Surfaces

Residues
in Soil

ROOT
UPTAKE

DERMAL UPTAKE
& INHALATION

Residues in/on
Pollen, Nectar,
Exudates,
Honey Dew

Residues
in Surface
Water

INGESTION
INGESTION

Foraging Bees

RECEPTORS

(workers)

(Nurse, Worker, Drone**)

POLLEN & NECTAR PROCESSING
INGESTION; COMB PRODUCTION

ATTRIBUTE
CHANGE

BROOD PROVISIONS

Hive Bees

Population Size and Stability of Colonies
Reduced colony strength and survival
Reduced queen fecundity & brood success
Reduced individual survival, behavior changes

Bee Brood

WAX, PROPOLIS
ROYAL JELLY

Queen**

Quantity and Quality of Hive Products
Reduced honey, wax & propolis production
Contribution to Pollinator Biodiversity
Reduced species richness and abundance

* Brood initially rely on brood jelly and royal jelly, but later in development consume processed pollen and honey, whereas queens rely solely on royal jelly.
** Interception of spray droplets is also a potential route of exposure during mating and orientation flights.

52

Formulating a Working Hypothesis

It should be noted that the EPA does not accept the
data that registrants submit at face value. Registrants
must submit raw data, methods, analyses, and conclusions to the EPA for reanalysis and re-review. After they
receive a registrant’s study, the EPA re-enters the raw
data, statistically reanalyzes the data, and generates an
independent review and conclusion.
This process takes considerable time and resources,
is subject to multiple levels of review within the agency,
and is intended to be transparent so that the EPA’s understanding of the data is clear, concise, and reasonable.
In addition to formal laboratory- and field-based
toxicity studies that registrants submit, the EPA also
relies on monitoring data (pesticide residues in air, soil,
and/or water) and incident reports about adverse effects
(such as bird, fish and/or bee kills) to assess risk. Other
regulatory authorities (including state and tribal
governments), the registrants, or the general public
provide these data.

After determining routes of exposure, the EPA creates
a working hypothesis to determine how likely the pesticide could harm nontarget organisms such as honey
bees. They base this risk hypothesis on the pesticide’s
properties, possible routes of exposure, estimated
environmental concentrations, and the measured
toxicity of the pesticide. This initial risk hypothesis can
(and often does) change as the review team becomes
better acquainted with the pesticide’s toxicological
and environmental characteristics.

Analyzing the Data

The next phase of the risk assessment process includes
an intensive review and summary of the available
toxicity and environmental fate data. These data include registrant-submitted studies, studies published
in scientific journals (open literature), environmental
monitoring data, and ecological incident data.
The law requires that any studies a registrant submits
to the EPA must indicate whether the studies followed
Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) standards. The standards are meant to ensure consistency, reliability, and
transparency in the data. Failing to comply with GLP
standards can result in cancellations, suspensions, or
modifications of a registration or research permit,
penalties, or even criminal prosecution. Open literature
studies must also meet the standard defined by the
Data Quality Act. The EPA has published guidance for
regulatory risk assessors on evaluating open literature
studies for qualitative or quantitative use in ecological
risk assessments that support regulatory decisions.

53

Comparing Exposure and Effects
in a Tiered Approach
To assess potential risks to pollinators, the EPA uses a
process outlined in Guidance for Assessing Pesticide Risks
to Bees (see References, page 68).
The EPA Risk Assessment Flowchart depicts the EPA’s
tiered approach for assessing the risks from foliar-applied
pesticides (we will describe the terms in the flowchart
in more detail in the pages that follow). The illustration
shows how the process moves from evaluating risk using
laboratory-based studies of individual bees (Tier 1), to
enclosure and/or feeding (semi-field) studies using whole
colonies (Tier 2), to full-field studies using full-size colonies
(Tier 3) under actual use conditions. The EPA uses similar
flow diagrams (with slight differences) to evaluate the
risk to honey bees from seed treatments and soil and
tree applications.

54

A tiered approach allows the EPA to quickly evaluate
(screen) pesticides that are shown not to harm pollinators. This allows them to allocate resources to address
products likely to be of more concern. The EPA’s tiered
approach to assess risks (and the tests underlying the
process) are relatively consistent with those used in
Europe and elsewhere. This reflects a common understanding of the science and is practical for the registrants
who can submit the same data to other countries without having to generate new data.
When a registrant develops a new product, the tiered
approach provides them with an understanding
of the criteria the EPA will use to evaluate the potential
risks to bees from the proposed or existing uses of a
pesticide.

EPA RISK ASSESSMENT FLOWCHART
1

Presumption
of minimal risk

Details of the product and its use pattern

2a

Is exposure of
adult bees
a concern?

CONTACT EXPOSURE

3a

4a

2b

Is exposure of
bee brood
a concern?

ORAL EXP.

Calculate Tier 1
screening-level EEC for
adult contact exposure

3b

Calculate Tier 1
screening-level RQs for
adult contact exposure

4b

ORAL EXPOSURE

Calculate Tier 1
screening-level EEC for
adult oral exposure
via pollen and nectar

Calculate Tier 1
screening-level RQs for
adult oral exposure
RQ = EEC/adult acute oral LD50
RQ = EEC/adult chronic NOAEC*

RQ = EEC/adult acute contact LD50

5

No Tier 1 brood
assessment

3c

4c

Calculate Tier 1
screening-level EEC for
larval oral exposure
via brood food

Calculate Tier 1
screening-level RQs for
larval oral exposure
RQ = EEC/larval acute LD50
RQ = EEC/larval chronic NOAEC*

Does any RQ exceed LOC?

a,b,c

EXPOSURE

EFFECTS
Refine Tier 1 exposure assessment

6

Presumption
of minimal risk

(e.g., using available crop residue studies)

Recalculate RQs

TIER 1

TIER 1

Conservative
estimates

7

a,b,c

Does any RQ exceed LOC?

8

Consider risk mitigation
options, uncertainties and
other lines of evidence;

Acute &
chronic
studies

(models)

TIER 2

Pollen &
nectar
residues

9a

Conduct Tier 2
colony-level
effect studies

Is a higher Tier assessment needed?

(e.g., semi-field)

9b

Conduct Tier 2
exposure studies
(e.g., residues in
pollen & nectar)

TIER 3

TIER 2

Semi-field
scale
studies
TIER 3

Field
studies

Field
studies

Evaluate Tier 2 exposure
and colony-level effect result.
Consider uncertainties and
other lines of evidence.

10

Do results indicate risk?

12

Conduct Tier 3
field studies
to address
uncertainties

Consider risk mitigation
options, uncertainties and
other lines of evidence;

11

Presumption
of minimal risk

Is a higher Tier assessment needed?

13

Evaluate Tier 2 exposure and
colony-level effect result.
Consider uncertainties and
other lines of evidence.
Do results indicate risk?

* When tests are sufficiently developed and vetted

Presumption
of risk

55

Yes
No
Optional

Tier 1 — Effects to Individual Honey Bees

The EPA requires five Tier 1 laboratory-based studies
on individual bees and larvae. The Tier 1 laboratory studies include acute tests (for single exposures) and chronic
tests (for repeated exposures):

The five required Tier 1 studies form a screening level
assessment. The data from these studies help the EPA
determine if the worst-case scenario of bee exposure
in the environment would harm bees.
First, let’s look at what the Tier 1 studies measure,
then let’s explore how the EPA uses those data measurements in their risk assessment process.

• Adult acute contact toxicity
• Adult acute oral toxicity
• Larval acute oral toxicity
• Adult chronic 10-day oral toxicity
• Larval chronic 21-day oral toxicity

Acute and Chronic Studies

If these studies indicate a cause for concern, then
registrants may be required to complete a foliage
residue toxicity study (a Tier 1 study).
Registrants may also be required to perform further
studies that examine effects on the entire colony:

Remember that the EPA requires all registrants to submit
five studies that examine the effects a pesticide will have
on individual bees.
The primary goal of an acute toxicity study is to
determine how much of a pesticide it will take to kill 50
percent of the individual bees they test. This standard,
called the LD50 (for lethal dose, 50 percent), is a commonly
used value in toxicology and has been found to be a
reliable way to evaluate acute toxicity.
But the EPA testing guidelines for acute toxicity aren’t
just concerned with bee death. The EPA specifies that
toxicity studies must document all sublethal effects that
may occur. If the data on sublethal effects are sufficient
to support a reliable dose-response relationship, the EPA
may use a median “effect dose” for 50 percent of the
bees tested (called the ED50) to assess risk.
The primary goal of a chronic toxicity study is to
determine a pesticide’s toxicity through repeated
exposure. For chronic toxicity, researchers are trying
to determine two values:

• Semi-field toxicity (Tier 2)
• Colony feeding toxicity (Tier 2)
• Full field toxicity (Tier 3)
Once a registrant generates the necessary data from
the initial Tier 1 studies, they can readily calculate risk
quotients to determine whether they need to test the
product further. Registrants often weigh the potential
costs associated with higher-tier testing versus what they
expect the product will generate in the marketplace. In
other words, if the expenses to test a pesticide in Tier 2
and Tier 3 studies is more than what a registrant expects
to earn, they may choose not to register the product.
The Appendix (page 69) provides detailed descriptions of how researchers conduct all of these studies.
We describe how the EPA uses the data from these
studies below.

Approximate
Costs to Conduct
EPA-required
Tests

Testing a new pesticide can be costly. Here are some estimated
costs for the bee risk assessment studies the EPA requires.

A lab study — $30,000 to $50,000
A semi-field study — $75,000 to $150,000
A full field study — $1.2 million

56

1. The no-observed adverse effect level (NOAEL) —
this is the highest dose of the pesticide at which no
adverse effects are observed
2. The lowest-observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) —
this is the lowest dose of the pesticide that was
observed to cause adverse effects

To calculate the RQ, the EPA divides the EEC by the
proper measurement from the studies. That is, each Tier
study will have its own RQ — there will be risk quotient
for each route of exposure. For example, the RQ for adult
acute oral toxicity would be:
Exposure (e.g., dose) ÷ LD50 = RQ
The exposure (e.g., dose) is determined by the EEC,
and (in this example) the LD50 comes from the adult
acute oral toxicity study.

Chronic studies document sublethal effects on a bee’s
growth, survival, and development. Sublethal effects
for adult bees can include eating less, disproportionate
agitation, excessive grooming, disorientation, and
impaired foraging activity. Effects for larvae include
decreased food consumption and increased time to
pupation or adult emergence.

After the EPA determines the RQ, they compare that
number to the level of concern (LOC). For pesticides, the
LOC for acute risk is always 0.4 and the LOC for chronic
risk is always 1.0.
Let’s consider a simple example. Let’s say that an
adult acute oral toxicity study determined that the LD50
for a product was 100 parts per million (ppm). The dose
(which predicts worst-case exposure) for the product
was 15 ppm. So:

Estimated Environmental Concentrations,
Risk Quotients, and Levels of Concern
So, the acute and chronic laboratory studies determine
the level of pesticide exposure it will take to harm
individual bees. But to fully estimate risk, the EPA also
must know what the actual exposure might be.
To predict that exposure during the screening assessment, the EPA uses a model to determine the pesticide’s
estimated environmental concentration (EEC). The EEC is
a predicted concentration of the pesticide in the environment based on application rates, pesticide properties,
and other factors. When the EPA sets this concentration,
they use the worst-case scenario that predicts higher
pesticide levels than would typically be found in the environment. After they determine the EEC, the EPA must
convert the EEC to doses. They determine the doses by
considering how much pollen or nectar bees of different
castes, ages, and sexes may consume.
Now, the EPA can make a preliminary risk assessment
by calculating a risk quotient (RQ).
The RQ is an equation that uses the dose (determined
from the EEC) and one the measurements from the acute
(LD50) and chronic (NOAEL) studies. That is, each Tier 1
study will have its own RQ — there will be a risk quotient
for adult acute oral toxicity, another for adult acute contact toxicity, and so on. In addition, regulators calculate RQs for each crop and application method listed on
the label. The risk is different for each scenario. In other
words, a single pesticide may pose a low risk on some
crops and a high risk on others.

15 ÷ 100 = 0.15
For this example, the product would have a risk quotient
of 0.15, which puts it well below the 0.4 level of concern.

Screening Risk
The EPA Risk Assessment Flowchart (page 55) shows us
an example of what the EPA would do at this stage. The
EPA compares the RQ values and the LOC values. If the
RQ values are lower than the LOC values, then the EPA
presumes that the product will post a minimal risk to the
health of the colony.
If RQ values are greater than the LOC values, that
doesn’t automatically mean that there will be an unacceptable risk in the environment. Remember that the
EPA predicts the EEC (environmental exposure) based
on worst-case estimates.

Vacuuming pollen from orange tree flowers. © Smithers Viscient

57

The EPA can refine its overall risk assessment by using
actual measured pesticide residue levels on pollen,
nectar, and foliage rather than the predicted EECs
(when such data are available). These actual measured
levels come from submitted studies. Researchers
typically conduct such studies on multiple crops and,
depending on the crop, researchers collect samples for
residue analyses directly from the treated plants or from
bees foraging on the treated crop.
If a foliage toxicity study shows that the actual
environmental exposure is significantly lower than the
predicted EEC, then the EPA can use this actual level
(instead of the EEC) to refine the RQ.
If the RQ calculated with the actual exposure falls
below the LOC, then the EPA presumes that the product
will pose a minimal risk to individual bees (and by
extension, to the colony). At this point, the pesticide
may pass the Tier 1 screen as long as no other data
(open literature studies, incident data) indicate potential
adverse effects.
Even if the RQ with the actual exposure is still greater
than the LOC, the registrant can work with the EPA to
develop mitigation measures. However, the EPA has
to agree to any proposed risk mitigation measures
intended to reduce exposure.

Researchers collect flowers from almond trees. They must be careful to avoid
contaminating nectar and pollen. © Smithers Viscient

These mitigation measures could include one or more
of the following:
• Prohibiting applications to blooming crops
• Limiting applications to when bees are less
likely to be foraging (dusk to dawn)
• Reducing application rates
• Reducing the number of applications
• Increasing the time between applications
(longer reapplication intervals)
• Restricting use to crops with lower exposure levels
• Limiting the type of application equipment
While these are legitimate ways to reduce exposure to
honey bees, these tactics can also reduce the product’s
efficacy and economic benefits, so they are not always
feasible. Some insect pests have multiple life cycles or
the pest pressure might be high enough to warrant
multiple applications. So, reducing a pesticide rate might

58

effectively reduce how much pesticide is being applied,
it might also mean that it no longer effectively controls
the pest. Reduced rates may also lead to target insects
developing pesticide resistance.
Depending on the EPA’s need for additional information, they may require Tier 2 and possibly Tier 3 studies
to address unanswered questions.

Tiers 2 and 3 — Colony-level Assessments

While pesticide exposure can harm bees at the individual
level, it is the pesticide’s overall impact to the colony that
is critical to the health and survival of social bees. Given
the complexities of a honey bee colony and its division
of labor, and the fact that honey bees may forage on
a variety of floral sources rather than exclusively on a
single crop, the colony may be able to tolerate higher
levels of a pesticide exposure than individual bees under
laboratory test conditions.
However, risk assessors do not use data from colonylevel studies to calculate RQ values. While there are tools
to estimate exposure to individual bees, it is more complicated to estimate exposure to the whole colony.
Currently, the data collected during Tier 2 and Tier
3 studies are evaluated in combination with laboratory
studies of individual bees (from both registrant-submitted
studies and those gleaned from the open literature). These
evaluations help determine whether there is enough
information to refute or support the risk hypothesis
associated with a particular pesticide.

Building net tunnels over almond trees. © Smithers Viscient

The EPA’s understanding of the risk assessment
process continues to evolve as the science evolves. The
EPA has identified additional studies to assist in the risk
assessment process. For honey bees, they have added
multiple studies to help quantitatively and qualitatively
assess risks. Although many of the studies are not currently specified in the Code of Federal Regulations Part
158, the EPA can require such studies as it deems necessary to support risk assessments and decision-making.
The EPA has worked closely with stakeholders to
ensure that they are aware of the data needed to support the risk assessment process. In many cases, registrants submit the data packages to the EPA with the full
complement of studies, particularly in cases where a
compound is proposed for use at bloom on crops that
are attractive to pollinators.

Spraying almond trees with test substance before tunnel construction. © Smithers Viscient

59

The EPA has been working with researchers in
the USDA-Agricultural Research Service to develop
a colony simulation model to estimate the effects of
pesticides on honey bee colonies. The model uses
laboratory toxicity data about pesticides to simulate
the effects on colony condition (numbers of adult
and brood bees) and queen performance. The
model can also look at the interaction of pesticide
exposure with Varroa mite loads.
Such predictive tools (after being sufficiently
vetted) can serve as another line of evidence to
support risk assessments and may reduce the need
for more elaborate colony-level studies. Other
regulatory agencies around the world are developing similar models. So, the EPA (and its international
counterparts) continue to advance the science of
assessing risks to bees.
This researcher is using computer technology to make detailed brood assessments
to assess hive health. © Smithers Viscient

We know how many days it takes a bee to go through the stages of larvae, prepupa, and adult. If a pesticide contained in the brood jelly affects
growth and development, researchers can use larval survival and adult emergence to evaluate the extent of the effects. © Smithers Viscient

60

Is the Risk Quotient Above or
Below Levels of Concern?
The “last” phase of the risk assessment process we discuss
is risk characterization. This phase consists of two parts:
risk estimation and risk discussion. The EPA generally
quantifies risk as a ratio between expected environmental concentrations and the most sensitive acute and
chronic toxicity values for nontarget organisms.
The EPA uses a model to estimate a pesticide’s exposure to bees via contact and diet (pollen and nectar
consumption) for various ages and classes of bees. The
model uses worst-case situations that predict higher
pesticide levels than would typically be found in the
environment.
For the screening-level assessment, the EPA focuses
on determining if a pesticide is unlikely to harm bees
even under the worst-case scenario. The concept is

simple enough: The pesticide can harm bees if the level
of environmental exposure is greater than the level
shown to be toxic. If the amount of pesticide in the
environment (even at its worst-case level) is sufficiently
lower than the toxic level (determined from laboratory
studies), then regulators predict that bees are unlikely
to be adversely affected by contact exposure or by
ingesting nectar and pollen from peak residue levels
in the treated crop.
For pesticides that exceed levels of concern, regulators can refine the risk assessment based on higher-tier
effects data and exposure data (measured residues in
pollen and nectar). For these assessments, regulators
often determine the risk for the whole colony (from the
Tier 2 and Tier 3 studies) as well as individual bees.

61

Registration Decisions Go Through
Extensive Reviews
The EPA’s decision whether to register or reregister an
active ingredient considers the products potential effects
on human health and wildlife, coupled with an understanding of the benefits that the compound affords.
A division of the EPA evaluates the benefits of using a
compound. This is an ongoing process for chemicals
already registered. The law requires the EPA to re-evaluate
each chemical on a 15-year cycle to ensure that the
underlying data and assessment methods are current
with the science.
FIFRA requires the EPA to determine whether a
compound meets the FIFRA “standard” — that using
a compound does not represent an unreasonable risk

to human health and the environment. The EPA may determine that a pesticide is ineligible for registration or
reregistration if the risks exceed the benefits the product
provides. If the benefits outweigh risks, then the EPA may
proceed with registration/reregistration and require the
registrant to place risk reduction measures on the label.
The Federal Register publishes the outcome of the risk
assessment and risk management decision. The public
can provide written comments directly to the agency
about the the science used and the conclusions drawn
from the risk assessment. Stakeholders (registrants,
advocacy groups, the public) are free to pursue legal
measures if they disagree with the regulatory decision.

62

The Label Puts the
Risk Assessment to the Test
The label forms the foundation
for the risk assessment process
and ensures that the compound
is used in a way that is consistent
with the FIFRA standard. Users
must follow Directions for Use
and advisory hazard statements
on product labels to avoid posing
an unreasonable risk to human
health or the environment.
The EPA approves all pesticide
labels as part of the registration
and reregistration process. The EPA
may require specific instructions
appear under the environmental
hazard statement to protect honey
bees and pollinators.
The EPA requires a pesticide
label to carry advisories/warnings
when the product may contaminate various habitats or harm
particular taxa. These statements
are typically based on the environmental fate and toxicity data
evaluated during the risk assessment process.
Examples of standard hazard statements include:

The EPA Bee Advisory Box

In order to achieve more consistent label language, the
EPA developed the Label Review Manual (see References,
page 68) to guide risk managers. The manual relies on
data submitted in support of registration and reregistration. However, pesticides can differ widely in their
environmental fate and effects. The EPA has the option
to add more restrictive language to the label. Such language allows the EPA to tailor a pesticide label to be
prescriptive and to provide additional instructions that
allow for case-by-case mitigation measures to fine tune
how the product is used.

• “This pesticide is toxic to bees exposed to direct
application. Applications should be timed to
coincide with periods of minimum bee activity,
usually late evening and early morning.”
• “This product is highly toxic to bees exposed to
direct treatment or residues on blooming crops
or weeds. Do not apply this product or allow it to
drift to blooming crops if bees are visiting the
treatment area.”

63

Moving Beyond the Label
While pesticide labels are intended to help minimize the
risks to human health and the environment, stakeholders
can perform voluntary actions to further reduce exposing
bees to pesticides.
The EPA has been working with state/tribal lead
agencies and a broad range of stakeholders to develop
managed pollinator protection plans (or MP3). In most
cases, the MP3s involved voluntary collaborations between stakeholders. For example, some of the plans
have encouraged beekeepers to voluntarily register their
colonies so that growers and applicators have a way to
know where apiaries are located.

The National Strategy to Promote the Health of Honey
Bees and Other Pollinators (see References, page 68) has
echoed the importance of communication, cooperation,
and collaboration between a broad range of stakeholders. They also encourage public-private partnerships that
can further our understanding of factors that affect pollinators and to develop ways to mitigate those factors.
The National Strategy also identifies what research we
need to advance our understanding of factors affecting
honey bees and other pollinating species.

64

Conclusion

While big, powerful, beautiful, and rare animal species
often dominate our attention, the common honey
bee is no less a marvel. Those who work in agriculture
understand that a healthy, productive, profitable, and
sustainable farming operation depends largely on these
and other unseen organisms. So, it is important that we
understand them and take steps to minimize the risks
we expose them to.

Bumble bees
are important
pollinators
of some
plants in the
tomato family.

65

Most farmers aim to do as little harm as possible
to pollinators while growing crops sustainably and
economically. It doesn’t matter if the farm is small or
large, organic or traditional, pollinators play a pivotal
role in boosting crop yields for many of the vegetables and fruits we consume each and every day.
However, pollinators represent more than just the
food we enjoy. Unlike many of the wildlife species
we see on nature programs, we can observe insect
pollinators in our backyards. We can easily watch
honey bees, butterflies, and other native pollinators
moving from flower to flower in our gardens and
landscapes.
Pesticides are part of our agricultural system,
Pollinator gardens attract bees, butterflies, and other pollinators throughout the season.
so the challenge before us is to minimize their
exposure to pollinators. Let’s return to the question
we posed at the start of this document: “Are honey
numbers. In national surveys, beekeepers consistently
bees in decline?”
report that they can compensate for losses of between
Managed honey bees certainly face multiple chal15 to 17 percent; however, overwintering losses the past
lenges. While USDA data indicate that the total number
decade have averaged 31 percent, and more recent
of managed colonies has been relatively constant in the
estimates of total annual losses have indicated a loss
United States since the mid-1990s, the data do not reflect
rate of 42 percent. Both estimates are well above what
the extra effort beekeepers have made to maintain these
beekeepers have indicated as economically sustainable.

66

Honey bees
and a solitary
bee (petal)
forage a
sunflower
head.

We have focused on the relatively unique biology of
the honey bee, how a honey bee colony functions as a
superorganism, and how regulators use this information
to evaluate the potential role of one risk factor, pesticides. The risk from any pesticide is a complicated function of exposure and toxicity which vary depending on
the biological cycles of the pollinator species. Clearly,
there are chemicals classified as highly toxic to bees,
and sufficient exposure can harm individual bees and
the colony.
Pesticide applicators and beekeepers are key components of our food production system. If they work together, they can achieve their individual goals and their
mutual goal of maintaining an abundant food supply.
Increasing communication between stakeholder groups
will help to reduce misinformation and may provide an
opportunity for greater collaboration and cooperation
between growers, applicators, and beekeepers. In turn,
communication can reduce pesticide exposure and risk
to bees.

Although pesticides are one of multiple factors
affecting bees, increasing awareness and mitigating the
effects of each factor will help to reduce the cumulative
impact. Although we focused on honey bees in this
publication, the considerations and protections we describe will extend to other non-Apis bees and beneficial
insects that provide ecosystem services for our shared
environment.

67

References
Guidance for Identifying, Selecting and
Evaluating Open Literature Studies (EPA)

National Strategy to Promote the
Health of Honey Bees and Other
Pollinators

www.epa.gov/pesticide-science-and-assessingpesticide-risks/guidance-identifying-selectingand-evaluating-open

obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/
default/files/microsites/ostp/Pollinator
%20Health%20Strategy%202015.pdf

Framework for Ecological Risk
Assessment (EPA)

Series 850 — Ecological Effects Test
Guidelines (EPA publications)

www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-11/
documents/framework_eco_assessment.pdf

www.epa.gov/test-guidelines-pesticidesand-toxic-substances/series-850-ecologicaleffects-test-guidelines

Good Laboratory Practice Standards
Compliance Monitoring Program (EPA)
www.epa.gov/compliance/good-laboratorypractices-standards-compliance-monitoringprogram

USDA Honey Bee Surveys and Reports

Guidance for Assessing Pesticide Risks
to Bees

White Paper in Support of the
Proposed Risk Assessment Process
for Bees

www.nass.usda.gov/Surveys/Guide_to_
NASS_Surveys/Bee_and_Honey

www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-06/
documents/pollinator_risk_assessment_
guidance_06_19_14.pdf

www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/emon/surfwtr/
presentations/epa_whitepaper.pdf

Label Review Manual (EPA)

Indiana’s MP3

www.epa.gov/pesticide-registration/
label-review-manual

www.oisc.purdue.edu/pesticide/
p3_activities.html

68

Appendix: Descriptions of EPA Testing Protocols
The EPA requires five tier 1 laboratory-based studies
on individual bees and larvae.
The Tier 1 laboratory studies include acute tests
(for single exposures) and chronic tests (for repeated
exposures):
• Adult acute contact toxicity
• Adult acute oral toxicity
• Larval acute oral toxicity
• Adult chronic 10-day oral toxicity
• Larval chronic 21-day oral toxicity
In addition to these tier 1 studies, the EPA may require
these tests:
• Foliage residue toxicity (a Tier 1 study)
• Semi-field toxicity (Tier 2)
• Colony feeding toxicity (Tier 2)
• Full field toxicity (Tier 3)
Laboratory studies typically use the pure active
ingredient (referred to as technical grade active
ingredient, TGAI). That said, the EPA may require studies
to be conducted using the technical end product (TEP),
which is the formulated product available to applicators
or consumers. The TEP contains the active ingredient(s)
plus other inert ingredients that can influence how
target and nontarget organisms absorb and distribute
the active ingredient.
This appendix describes each of the methods and
protocols for these tests.

A test arena for conducting the adult acute contact study. © Smithers Viscient

a known toxicant (typically the organophosphate insecticide dimethoate) referred to as the toxic reference (or
positive) control.
Researchers record signs of toxicity (number of dead
and disabled) at four, 24, and 48 hours. If adult bee mortality continues to increase at 48 hours, researchers extend the observation period to 96 hours. One outcome
of this study is if the data indicate that less than 11 micrograms (μg) per bee is toxic, then a follow-up toxicity of
residues on foliage test may be required.

Required Tests
Adult Acute Contact Toxicity

Adult Acute Oral Toxicity

The adult acute contact toxicity test (OCSPP 850.3020;
OECD Test Guideline 214), is a 48-hour test that typically
uses 25 to 30 adult bees for each of five dose levels.
Bees in each dose level may be divided into replicates.
For this test, researchers briefly anesthetize young
adult bees and place a single dose of the test material
in a suitable solvent (typically acetone) on the back (top
thorax) of the adult honey bee. Researchers must also
run suitable experiment control groups at the same time.
Control groups include running the test with water alone
(referred to as the negative control), running the test
with the solvent (if used), and running the test with

The adult acute oral toxicity test (OECD Test Guideline
213) involves testing five different dose levels. For each
level, there are three different groups (replicates) of at
least 10 honey bees.
For this test, researchers feed bees 100 to 200 microliters (µL) of 50 percent sucrose solution that they spiked
with the various dose levels of the pesticide. After a
maximum of six hours, researchers replace the treatment
solution with an unspiked sucrose solution. Researchers
then determine how much of a dose the bees consumed
by measuring how much of the spiked solution remains.

69

As with the other toxicity tests, researchers record
mortality and sublethal effects. They measure on days
five, six, and seven of the test and then calculate the
72-hour LD50 (cumulative mortality at day seven). As with
the acute toxicity tests with adult bees, researchers run
a negative control (untreated diet), a solvent control (if
used to dissolve the test item), and a positive control
(typically the insecticide dimethoate and/or the insect
growth regulator fenoxycarb).

Adult Chronic 10-day Oral Toxicity
The adult chronic oral toxicity test (draft OECD Test
Guideline) is based on for the adult acute oral toxicity
test. Again, researchers test five doses with three
replicates at each dose. Each replicate typically has a
minimum of 10 young (maximum of two-days old)
adult honey bees. Researchers expose honey bees to
a 50 percent (weight to volume) sugar solution that
contains a dose of the test chemical over a period of
10 days. Researchers evaluate the effects of the chemical
by comparing effects in the treated group to those of
the respective control. Researchers focus mainly on
mortality, but they also must report sublethal effects
(such as impaired behavior, decreased/increased food
consumption).
Researchers then determine the 10-day no-observed
effect concentration (NOAEC based on concentration in
the diet), the 10-day NOAEL (based on dose), the median
lethal concentration for 50 percent of the bees (10-day
LC50 based on concentration in the diet), and the 10-day
LD50 (based on dose). Depending on the quality of the
dose-response relationship, researchers may use a measurement endpoint other than mortality to calculate a
10-day EC50 and/or 10-day ED50. Similar to the acute toxicity tests, researchers run negative and solvent controls,
and reference toxicant control (typically dimethoate).

A test system for conducting the adult acute oral study. © Smithers Viscient

Researchers observe the bees and record mortality
and sublethal effects at four, 24, and 48 hours. If adult
bee mortality continues to rise by more than 10 percent
after the first 24 hours, they extend the test duration
to 96 hours. In addition to the five pesticide dose levels,
researchers must include suitable controls (negative;
solvent if warranted; and, reference).

Larval Acute Oral Toxicity
The larval acute oral toxicity test (OECD Test Guideline
237) uses first instar bee larvae.
Researchers place the larvae into separate wells of
36- or 48-well plates and feed them royal jelly combined
with several sugars (carbohydrate source) and yeast
extract (protein source). The diet is intended to be similar
to what nurse bees feed to developing larvae in honey
bee colonies. As with the oral acute oral test, researchers
test five different dose levels for the pesticide and
include replicates. Typically, researchers use a minimum
of 12 larvae collected from three separate honey bee
colonies for each replicate.
For the first three days of the study, researchers
feed larvae an untreated diet. On day four, researchers
provide a single dose of spiked diet (with a known concentration of test material). Typically, larvae consume the
entire amount of spiked diet within the day. After day
four, researchers resume feeding bees the untreated diet.

70

Larval Chronic 21-day Oral Toxicity
The larval chronic oral toxicity test (OECD Guidance
Document 239) is based on the design of acute larval
toxicity test. Again, researchers collect a minimum
of 12 first instar larvae collected from three separate
honey bee colonies. Each set of 12 larvae are a replicate,
and the researchers have three replicates for five treatment levels.
Initially, researchers feed larvae an untreated diet.
From day three through day six of the study, researchers provide a spiked diet that contains an increasing
known concentration of test material — larvae are
repeatedly dosed for four consecutive days. Larvae
stop eating after this time to make the transition to
a prepupa.
The study continues until the adult bees emerge
at day 22. Researchers record mortality and other
abnormal effects daily from days three through day
eight, and then again on day 15. Researchers also
record the cumulative number of emerged bees on
day 22. Researchers determine the NOAEC (based on
concentration in the diet), NOAEL (based on dose), the
median effect concentration for 50 percent of the bees
(EC50 based on concentration in the diet), and the ED50
(based on dose) are determined for adult emergence
on day 22. The study can also provide a LC50, LD50,
and NOAEC/NOAEL for larval survival at day eight.
As with the other tests, researchers also run negative
and solvent controls and a reference toxicant control
(typically dimethoate or fenoxycarb).

These images show a honey bee transition (metamorphosis) from prepupa (A)
to emergence (eclosion) as an adult (H).

All images on this page copyright to The International
Bee Research Association. Reproduced with permission
of the editors of the Journal of Apiculturual Research.

These photos show
a larval toxicity test.
Each well contains
a larva at a different
stage of development
from first instar (newly
hatched) larva (A) to
prepupa (G). The larvae
are surrounded by
brood jelly. Larvae
stop eating when they
transition to prepupa.

71

Tests that May Be Required
Foliage Residue Toxicity
The foliage residue toxicity test (OCSPP 850.3030)
is considered a Tier 1 study, but it is only required for
pesticides that are moderately or highly toxic (LD50
<11 µg/bee) via acute contact exposure. This study
determines the length of time that a compound
remains toxic to bees exposed to the treated foliage.
Researchers use the study to calculate the RT25,
which is defined as the residual time needed to reduce
the activity (toxicity) of the test substance and bring bee
mortality down to 25 percent of the tested populations.
The study has a field component in which researchers
make foliar applications to alfalfa and then treated foliage/residues are weathered for various amounts of time.
For the laboratory component of this study, researchers
expose bees to the freshly cut weathered foliage from
different time points. While the RT25 is not used in
calculating risk, the data have been used to develop
label advisory statements that include the length of
time a test substance is expected to remain toxic to
bees following contact exposure to residues of the
pesticide on vegetation.

Collecting lilac flowers for residue analysis in bee tunnel. © Smithers Viscient

Some beekeepers and growers consider the RT25
to be a useful way to identify products that are less
hazardous to bees, particularly if they need to apply the
pesticide at a specified time (such as before bees are
likely to be foraging). For example, if the RT25 is less than
three hours, applicators might apply the product after
dusk with some certainty that it is not likely to represent
a hazard to bees foraging on that crop the following day.
However, the RT25 is like other data used in evaluating
risk to bees — it represents one of several lines of evidence.
The EPA may also require field testing on whole
colonies. The EPA may request such studies if Tier 1
studies indicate that a compound is toxic to bees and
initial exposure estimates suggest that environmental
concentrations may be sufficient to result in adverse
effects on individual bees.
As studies transition out of the laboratory and into
more realistic exposure scenarios using entire bee colonies, then researchers typically use the actual product
that growers and applicators will actually use — as
opposed to just using the active ingredient in the lab.
As such, the semi-field (Tier 2) and full-field (Tier 3)
studies include both the active ingredient and the
“inerts” as part of the formulated product. Transitioning
to less controlled environments, means that researchers
must contend with weather, pests, diseases, and poor
nutrition that can confound test results.

Semi-field Toxicity
The semi-field toxicity test (Tier 2 Tunnel Study, OECD
75 and EPPO 170) is a Tier 2 study that uses tented
enclosures and small nucleus colonies (typically
five-frame colonies with approximately 5,000 to 7,000
bees). During this study, bees must forage in confined
areas that have been treated or where bees are provided spiked diets (treated sucrose solution and/or
spiked pollen and protein).

Bagging cranberry leaves for residue analysis. © Smithers Viscient

72

Colony Feeding Toxicity
The colony feeding toxicity test (a Tier 2 study) typically
uses a range of exposure levels to determine a NOAEC
and LOAEC for adults and brood.
Researchers can feed bees spiked diets for short
intervals (one feeding) to multiple feeding periods
(like six weeks). The extended periods simulate longer
duration exposures that may occur in crops with
prolonged bloom periods, such as with indeterminate
blooming crops (cotton, squash, strawberries). Since
the more extensive feeding studies typically last longer
and frequently involve larger colonies, the colonies are
monitored for longer periods. Some studies may even
include an overwinter component.
While not intended to be exhaustive, here are some
examples of measurements that researchers can collect
at the whole colony level:

© Smithers Viscient

In semi-field enclosure studies, researchers typically
apply the maximum pesticide rate on a pollinatorattractive crop (buckwheat, alfalfa, phacelia). This rate
ensures maximum exposure, and the study includes a
toxic reference (typically dimethoate and/or fenoxycarb)
and suitable negative controls to ensure that the study
is sensitive.
In a number of the studies, researchers apply the
compound by ground equipment while bees are actively
foraging to further ensure maximum “worst case” exposure. Since enclosures are somewhat limited in area
(about 200 feet x 330 feet), bees can undergo confinement
stress in such studies. For this reason, researchers do not
typically keep colonies in the enclosures any more than
two weeks. However, researchers continue to monitor
exposed colonies after removing them from the enclosures to determine whether there are any long-term
effects on the colonies. These monitoring periods
typically include at least one full brood cycle (21-days),
but frequently include multiple brood cycles. Bees are
removed to a clean site, preferably away from agricultural
fields to limit exposure to other pesticide products
during monitoring.

• Forager bee activity and mortality
• Queen fecundity (egg production)
• Brood development and survival
• Hive weight and strength (adult and larval
bee abundance)
• Quantity and quality of food reserves in hive

Full-field Toxicity
The full-field toxicity test (Tier 3 Study; OCSPP 850.3040)
is a Tier 3 study. The EPA tries to ensure that the study
design builds on existing data and focuses on remaining
uncertainties. Tier 3 studies are intended to answer very
specific questions and the design depends on the risk
hypothesis. Researchers may study full-size colonies
(approximately 20,000 to 40,000 bees) with free-foraging
bees are and exposure conditions are designed to be as
close to actual pesticide use conditions as possible.
Since the EPA Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution
Prevention does not have formal, detailed guidelines
for Tier 2 or Tier 3 studies with honey bee colonies, the
EPA typically requires registrants to submit proposed
protocols for EPA review before initiating the study. For
both the Tier 2 and Tier 3 studies, the EPA is particularly
interested in whether the colony is able to recover from
what may be direct (but often transient) effects on
survival, growth, or development of the colony.

This photo depicts a Tier 2 semi-field enclosure study. Researchers enclose
test plants (like buckwheat) in a tunnel covered by a fine plastic mesh to
prevent bees from escaping from the tunnel. © Smithers Viscient

73

The Protecting Pollinators series helps
everyone better understand pollinators
and their important roles in the
environment and in agriculture.

Protecting Pollinators in Home
Lawns and Landscapes (POL-1) —
Find out what homeowners can do
to protect pollinators in their home
landscapes.
Protecting Pollinators in Fruit and
Vegetable Production (POL-2) —
Learn how commercial fruit and
vegetable growers can protect
pollinators in their cropping systems.

Best Management
Practices for Indiana
Pollinator Habitat
(POL-5) — Learn
how to conserve and
establish effective
pollinator habitats.

Tips for Commercial Agricultural
Pesticide Applicators (PPP-113/POL-3)
— Understand management practices
commercial applicators can follow to
minimize any potential harm.
Protecting Pollinators in Agronomic
Crop Production (POL-4) — Read
about simple steps agronomic crop
producers can take to minimize the
negative effects of pesticide use.

Recommended
Indiana-native Plants
for Protecting Pollinators
(POL-6-W) — Use this list
to find recommended
plants you can use to
attract and protect
pollinators.

Why Should We Care About
Pollinators? (POL-7) — Learn more
about the threats pollinators face and
why it’s important to protect them.

Biology and Control
of Varroa Mites in
Bee Hives (POL-8) —
Find out how a tiny
mite can create big
problems for honey
bee hives.

Find Out More

Find more publications in the
Protecting Pollinators series by visiting
the Purdue Extension Education Store
www.edustore.purdue.edu

74

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Dawn Minns for graphic design and Adduci
Studios for illustrations. Thanks also to those who offered
constructive comments during the development of this
publication:
Silvia Hinarejos, Valent USA
Tammy Horn, Kentucky Department of Agriculture
Melvin Nicholson, Nicholson Consulting Service
Dan O’Hanion, Beekeeper
Bridget O’Neill, Dupont
Don Parker, National Cotton Council
Ken Simpson, Beekeeper
Disclaimer
This publication is intended for educational purposes only. The authors’
views have not been approved by any government agency, business, or
individual and cannot be construed as representing a perspective other
than that of the authors. The publication is distributed with the understanding that the authors are not rendering legal or other professional
advice to the reader, and that the information contained herein should not
be regarded or relied upon as a substitute for professional consultation.
The use of information contained herein constitutes an agreement to hold
the authors, companies or reviewers harmless for liability, damage, or expense incurred as a result of reference to or reliance upon the information
provided. Mention of a proprietary product or service does not constitute
an endorsement by the authors or their employers. Descriptions of specific
situations are included only as hypothetical case studies to assist readers
of this publication, and are not intended to represent any actual person,
business entity or situation. Reference in this publication to any specific
commercial product, process, or service, or the use of any trade, firm, or
corporation name is for general informational purposes only and does
not constitute an endorsement, recommendation, or certification of any
kind by Purdue University. Individuals using such products assume responsibility that the product is used in a way intended by the manufacturer
and misuse is neither endorsed nor condoned by the authors nor the
manufacturer.

This publication is supported by the Office of Indiana State Chemist Pollinator
Protection Plan. More information about the plan is available on the state
chemist’s website: www.oisc.purdue.edu/pesticide/p3_activities.html.

75

June 2017

1-888-EXT-INFO

•

www.extension.purdue.edu

Order or download materials from
Purdue Extension • The Education Store
www.edustore.purdue.edu

